KEP-3008: QoS-class resources (#3004)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/3008-qos-class-resources/README.md

- each type of QoS-class resource has an independent set of class identifiers

With QoS-class resources, Pods and their containers can request opaque
QoS-class identifiers (classes) of certain QoS mechanism (QoS-class resource
type). Kubelet relays this information to the container runtime which is
responsible for enforcing the request in the underlying system.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

This enhancement proposal aims at improving the quality of service of
applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control
mechanism. Certain types of resources are inherently shared by application (e.g.
cache, memory bandwidth and disk I/O) and while there are technologies for
controlling these, there is currently no meaningful way in Kubernetes to

> support those tehcnologies. This proposal suggests to address the issue above

Reviewer: s/tehc/tech/

  - Support Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resources
- Make the API to support updating QoS-class resource assignment of running containers
- Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other QoS-class
  resource types in the future.
- Make QoS-class resources opqaue (as possible) to the CRI client
- Discovery of the available QoS-class resources
- API changes to support updating Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resource
  assignment of running pods ([future work](#future-work))
- Resource status/capacity ([future work](#future-work))
- Access control ([future work](#future-work))

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Interface or mechanism for configuring the QoS-class resources (responsibility of
  the container runtime).
- Enumerating possible (QoS-class) resource types or their detailed behavior

## Implementation phases

This proposal splits the full implementation of QoS-class resources into
multiple phases, building functionality gradually, step-by-step. The goal is to
make the discussions more focused and easier. We may also learn on the way,

> insights from earlier phases affecting design choises made in the later phases,

Reviewer: s/choises/choices/

Author: Fixed

type ResourceRequirements struct {
     // Limits describes the maximum amount of compute resources allowed.
     Limits ResourceList `json:"limits,omitempty"
     // Requests describes the minimum amount of compute resources required.
     Requests ResourceList `json:"requests,omitempty"
+    // Classes specifies the QoS-class resources that the container should be assigned
+    Classes map[ClassResourceName]string
}

+// ClassResourceName is the name of a QoS-class resource.
+type ClassResourceName string
```

Also, we add a `Resources` field to the `PodSpec`. We will re-use the existing
`ResourceRequirements` type but Limits and Requests must be left empty. Classes
may be set and they represent the Pod-level assignment of QoS-class resources,
comparable to the PodClassResources message in PodSandboxConfig in the CRI API.

```diff
 type PodSpec struct {
@@ -224,4 +224,8 @@ type PodSpec struct {
     // Default to false.
     // +optional
     SetHostnameAsFQDN *bool `json:"setHostnameAsFQDN,omitempty" protobuf:"varint,35,opt,name=setHostnameAsFQDN"`
+    // Pod-level resources. Currently, requests and limits are not allowed
+    // to be specified for pods.
+    // +optional

> +    Resources ResourceRequirements

Reviewer 2: Can you share the reasoning on why the Resource model got adopted here?

What about a more exlicit API, i.e. following the runtimeClass API approach?

Reviewer 3: @fabiand can you elaborate a bit here about your runtimeClass question?

Author: > @fabiand can you elaborate a bit here about your runtimeClass question?

This was a bit unclear to me, too. IF you mean just a dedicated "top-level" field (like `PodSpec.QosClassResources`) we thought about that. However, in `Container` we put it under `Resources` and wanted to align with that plus https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1592 which would bring `Resources` field in PodSpec level, too. We could have s dedicated field on the "top-level" but then we should do the same thing in `Container`, too. Whichever seems more logical. Was this answering your question?

In any case, this is currently "scheduled" to the next implementation phase so there is time to think about this.

Author: @fabiand any input?

that aims at adding a pod level `Resources` field in a similar fashion.

In practice, the QoS-class resource information will be directly used in the CRI
ContainerConfig (e.g.  CreateContainerRequest message). At this point, without
resource discovery or access control kubelet does not do any validity checking
of the values. Invalid class assignments will cause an error in the container
runtime which causes the corresponding CRI RuntimeService request (e.g.
RunPodSandbox or CreateContainer) to fail with an error.

This phase would likely also wire QoS-class resources to
[In-place pod vertical scaling](#1287), allowing updates of running containers.

Input validation of classes very similar to labels is implemented: keys
(`ClassResourceName`) and values must be non-empty, less than 64 characters
long, must start and end with an alphanumeric character and may contain only
alphanumeric characters, dashes, underscores or dots (`-`, `_` or `.`).
Similar to labels, a namespace prefix (FQDN subdomain separated with a slash)
in the key is allowed, similar to labels, e.g. `vendor/resource`.

#### Update sandbox-level QoS-class resources

> This future step would be a second extesion to the CRI API.

Reviewer: s/extesion/extension/

burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

In this section we refer to different
[implementation phases](#implementation-phases). In this KEP we're now
targeting phase 1.

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: ClassResources
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
    - Implementation Phase 1:

>         - kubelet

Reviewer: Above you mention an API server validation for the annotations, is that not part of phase 1? If it is, then you also need to gate this feature in apiserver.

Author: Woops, I added that detail (validation of annotations) in the KEP but failed to update the PRR Questionnaire... Fixed: I now added kube-apiserver in phase 1, too.

Well-spotted, thank you

configuration etc) which makes it very impractical to control from the Pod spec
level. In order to hide this complexity the concept of blockio classes has been
added to the container runtimes (CRI-O and containerd). A system administrator
is able to configure blockio controller parameters on per-class basis and the
classes are then made available for CRI clients. Following this model also
provides a possible framework for the future improvements, for instance
enabling class-based network or memory type prioritization of applications.

Currently, there is no mechanism in Kubernetes to use these types of resources.
CRI-O and containerd runtimes have support for RDT and blockio classes and they
provide an bridge-gap user interface through special pod annotations. The goal
is to get these types of resources first class citizens and properly supported
in Kubernetes, providing visibility, a well-defined user interface, and
permission controls.

It seems necessary to support both container-level and pod-level QoS-class
resources as independent concepts. Intel RDT (above) is per-container by
design because of the hardware implementation (the control/class hiearchy is

> flat). Also, the current support for blockio is container-level only (it is not

Reviewer 4: This doesn't make sense to me. Pods have cgroups and various (kernel) namespaces, right? What mechanism or architectural restriction stops us from applying the `resctl` allocation to the entire Pod cgroup?

Reviewer 3: The resctl is flat structure. It is not like cgroup, so you have only limited (by hardware) set of classes defined, and then you can attach process to only one of those classes. In theory, we can put the whole PIDs from all cgroup subdirs for the pod to the resctl pid list, but that would require plumbing on the lower layers, including but not limiting to OCI spec, runc, runtime shims... 

And that's probably should be done as separate story: the container level cgroups/resctl manipulations are done by runtimes in accordance of OCI spec, and the whole Pod level cgroups management that is currently implemented inside kubelet. If we want to play nicely with pod level resources, we need to improve CRI protocol to have proper contract "who is doing what".

Reviewer 4: Rather than talk about RDT here, which I think is a bit of a red herring, how about using an example of something which is shared across a Pod. Network interface is the easiest example to explain as Pods conventionally have just one, but there are some other examples like volume I/O performance class (storage attachments are at the Pod level, even if not all containers access all defined volumes).

It's OK to keep the detail about RDT shortcomings as an aside to wrap things up and show where it can be a bit tricky to work within existing restrictions. Having different RDT classes per container is plausible, whereas a per-container QoS measure on the shared netns might well not even make sense as an idea.

Author: I think this could possibly be resolved, see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3004#discussion_r1096100072

Reviewer 4: The wording here is unchanged AIUI - did you want to update it at all? I recommend mentioning RDT last or as an aside

> in theory, we can put the whole PIDs from all cgroup subdirs for the pod to the resctl pid list

I don't like to constrain our API design - that we may have to live with essentially forever - if the main motivation is that it's tricky to do a thing we actually _can_ do.

There are other things we can do with K8s - for example, we can launch multiple containers in a Pod that all have the same netns, or that all have the same ServiceAccount token mounted. If we can achieve those across multiple containers than I don't see that making multiple containers in a Pod share a `resctl` assignment is particularly tricky. We either control creation of the threads in that Pod or they are cloned from a thread that we did control.

We shouldn't have to worry about processes that are in the Pod but not in any of the Pod's containers, because there aren't any (there's the `pause` process; we run that in a container too).

I'm assuming that `resctl` assignments survive any `clone()` call that an unprivileged container process can make. If that doesn't hold, though, we've got a bigger problem anyway.

Reviewer 3: `resctl` survives `clone()`. However, processes in containers and "pod process" are not the same parent, as far as I recall. In any case, initial assigning of container to particular cache/membw class is easy task. updating that, to assign it to another class is not so trivial case.

possible to configure pod sandbox-level cgroup parameters). However, having
pod-level QoS-class resources makes it possible to implement support for
sandbox-level blockio parameters. Other usage for pod sandbox-level QoS-class
resources would be communicating the Kubernetes Pod QoS class from
kubelet to the container runtime.

> ### Goals

Reviewer 5: I tried to put all considerations for new resources into this list of questions. I can find some answers in this KEP, but not other. Can you please think of the way (maybe separate section) to answer these questions:

1. Advertising resources
  - Are QoS resources static for the lifetime of a Node?
  - How kubelet will know about resource availability?
  - If not static, how will kubelet be notified of a change to start eviction or start admitting pods?
  - Will there be any “system reserved” portion of QoS resources that kubelet needs to be aware of?
  - Would it be often that static Pods needs QoS resources? (note: static pod scheduling sometimes makes race with other resources scheduling)

2. Scheduling Pods with QoS resources
  - How scheduler will make a decision on node assignment based on QoS resource availability? Is it fine to just take first that will fit or scheduler typically will need to spread out Pods with the same QoS?
  - How different classes of QoS must be spread out? 

3. Limits, quotas, and defaults
  - Are those resources subject for limit ranger, defaults, and quotas?

4. Admission on the node
  - What information will the kubelet need to know to admit the Pod with the specific QoS? Will it require additional external calls to the runtime?
  - Will pod admission fall in a situation when Pod seems to be scheduleable on the Node based on QoS, but admission fails? How many additional factors pod admission may take into consideration when dealing with pod admission and allocating of the resource?

5. Allocating resource
  - If kubelet restart, will the QoS class assignment be in-tact or there needs to be an additional state recording Pod to resource allocation?

6. Support overprovisioning
  - How overprovisioning may be supported by this resource? Will there be a setting to allow “better” class unless it’s taken by a new Pod?
  - Will bursting in other QoS class be desired?
  - Will there be a need to dynamically change class assignment based on other Pods being scheduled on the Node?

7. Monitoring of usage
  - How do end users know that the resource is being used properly - correct QoS is selected or better one is needed?
  - Does kubelet need to have any monitoring of resource usage beyond # of pods using the resource?

8. Eviction
  - Will we need to think of an eviction of Pods based on classes availability?
  - Will limits of resources require kubelet evict lower priority Pods to allow higher priority pods to be scheduled?

Author: I don't know if it was evident but I replied to these in a separate comment (iirc there was some problem back then and I wasn't able to reply to this comment directly back then)
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3004#issuecomment-1414043336

limitation in that and we are planning to implement update support for them
in the future.

We also extend the Kubernetes API to support the assignment of QoS-class
resources to applications via PodSpec, and to users and the kube-scheduler to
see availability of QoS-class resources on a per-node basis via NodeStatus.

Container runtime is expected to be aware of all resource types and the classes
within. The CRI protocol is extended to be able to communicate the available
QoS-class resources from the runtime to the client. This information includes:
- Available QoS-class resource types.
- Available classes within each resource type.
- Whether the resource type is immutable or if it supports in-place updates.
  In-place updates of resoures might not be possible because of runtime
  limitations or the underlying technology, for example.

QoS-class resources may be bounded in the way that the number of applications
that can be assigned to a specific class (of one QoS-class resource) on a node
can be limited. This limit is configuratble on a per-class (and per-node)
basis. This can be used to e.g. limit access to a high-tier class.

> Pod-level and container-level QoS-class resources are completely independent

Author: They are separate entities in the node status. Could be shown with `kubectl describe no` e.g. like
```
Pod QoS resources:
  Name      Classes (capacity)
  ----      ------------------
  net       slow(inf)    normal (8)  fast (2)
  qoz-xyz   cls-1 (inf)  cls-2 (1)   cls-3 (5)  cls-4 (10)

Container QoS resources:
  Name     Mutable  Classes (capacity)
  ----     -------  ------------------
  blockio  No       low-prio (inf)   normal (10)   high-prio (3)
  rdt      No       bronze (inf)     gold (1)      silver (2)
```

resource types. E.g. specifying something in the pod-level request does not

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Author: I could think of e.g. basically any cgroup-related controls (not that it would currently be neatly possible to control pod cgroups from the runtime level, but anyway...). You might have a pod-level QoS but you'd not necessarily enforce that as a default for all containers that don't have explicitly specified that same QoS resource.

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Reviewer 6: Most of cgroups is inherently hierarchical - when does setting a pod QoS not imply the containers underneath it?

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Author: > Most of cgroups is inherently hierarchical - when does setting a pod QoS not imply the containers underneath it?

I think it is very possible that one wants to apply totally different parameterization on the pod-level cgroup vs. container-level cgroup. Think about prioritization for example - pod-level setting is about the pod contending against other pods but the container level setting is about contending against other containers within the pod. Or maybe you'd want to set some limits/throttling on the pod level but configure only priority on the container level.

But now that I've thought about this subject once again I suddenly came up with one possible idea regarding pod vs. container level QoS resources and defaults:
1. We would deny registering pod and container level QoS resource on the same name (which might be wise in any case)
2. In addition, we would allow specifying a container-level QoS resource in the pod-level resource field in the PodSpec
3. This (container-level QoS resources specified in pod-level field) would be regarded as a default for containers of the pod. 
4. Pod-level QoS-resources could not be specified in the container level, however.

Any thoughts on this @thockin @sftim?

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Reviewer 6: sounds plausible.

How do the failures get surfaced?  It seems like it can't be static (API time).  If I put a pod-level QoS-resource in a container's specification, does it just never schedule?

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Reviewer 4: Kubernetes has so many extension points that - IMO - it's a shame not to use them.

How I'd recommend doing it: if a QoS class assignment only works at the Pod level, use either ValidatingAdmissionPolicy or a similar mechanism to reject Pods that try to specify it at the container level. And vice versa.

The default should be to allow specifying a QoS class assignment for the Pod and then to override that for a specific container. That's the most flexible, and will fix some circumstances. For example, the fictional `kubernetes.io/container-filesystem-storage` QoS class.

Bonus points for warning on the equivalent mistake in a Pod template.

To make this more easy, we could define an **entirely optional** CRD for QoS classes and an out-of-tree controller that sets up the admission time validation. Then, in a cluster that has that CRD and controller, you define your new QoSClass and everything works great. Try to set an unrecognized QoSClass? We can fail that at admission time too.

---

However, there's more than one way to do it. I'll wager there's more than seven, even.

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Author: > How do the failures get surfaced? It seems like it can't be static (API time). If I put a pod-level QoS-resource in a container's specification, does it just never schedule?

Mm, there was an obvious gap in my quick solution 🧐 In my reasoning I was only considering the "official" names in which case it's obvious. We know at the API level and thus also in the scheduler which are pod level qos resources and which are container level resources. We can have an admission check for that and reject. But for vendor/runtime specific "non-official" it wouldn't be possible with the current design (and the pod would just be pending) but maybe that would be enought(?)

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Reviewer 6: As long as it stays pending with a useful error that I can easily find, I guess it's as good as we can do.

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Reviewer 4: I think we can recommend that if you're adding a custom QoS class resource to a cluster, you should also implement your own admission controls so that the pending pod situation doesn't arise.

We won't lead the horses to water, but we can document that they get thirsty.

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Reviewer 6: We don't really have a notion of admission allowance, just "lack of deny".  If I fat-finger a resource name and say "example.com/f00" when I meant "example.com/foo", the validation is going to pass and the pod will pend forever.  We don't have a canonical "list of resource names known to any node in the cluster" and I am not sure we want that.

In this case, we can probaly do better than *just* pending forever - but I don't know if it's a requirement.  Admission control on pods is a dangerous game - I can see how people might not want a lot of those :)

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Reviewer 3: I agree on dangerous precedent of admission controls for vendor' reousce names... It can be implemented, but that's not cheap operation on scale, because information from all nodes needs to be collected...

That's why, I'd suggest to keep it simple: follow the same practice as with extended resources/device plugins.
That means that pods with wrong names are accepted, but will be in pending state forever.
People can use `Descheduler` https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/descheduler#podlifetime  to clean-up those.

> mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

Author: I agree. We can do admission-time validation of the "official" names (at GA as it's now proposed in the KEP) but vendor-specific resources would be outside of this, also in terms of recommended practices

Currently we identify two types of container-level QoS-class resources (RDT and
blockio) but the API changes will be generic so that it will serve other

> similar resources in the future. Currently there are no immediately enabled

Author: Bad English, at least partly. What I tried to say that when enabling QoS resources in the runtimes (if/after the CRI API changes are merged) we don't have in mind any pod-level QoS resources that would be implemented there in that initial implementation.

> similar resources in the future. Currently there are no immediately enabled

Reviewer 6: ACK!

pod-level QoS-class resources but we see usage scenarios for those in the
future (communicating the pod QoS class to the runtime and enabling pod-level
cgroup controls for blockio).

We introduce a feature gate that enables Kubernetes components (kubelet,
kube-apiserver, kube-scheduler) to support QoS-class resources.

> ### User Stories (Optional)

Reviewer 5: can you please think of any ways this can be abused for non-resource related features? With the cases of possible abuse, will there be alternative approaches k8s already supports today that would work better?

Examples I can think of are: 
- using QoS class instead of node labels to indicate some features
- using QoS class like an alterative for pod and node affinity
- replacement of runtimehandler, priority class (better limiting of priority class pods)?
- if there will be external call during pod admission - can this be abused as generic pod admission plugin system?

Author: > can you please think of any ways this can be abused for non-resource related features? With the cases of possible abuse, will there be alternative approaches k8s already supports today that would work better?

This is a good commit. Overall when I now looked at the user stories they are way too brief and narrow in perspective (the KEP has evolved quite a bit but the user stories haven't been touched much).

I think the QoS resources mechanism could be "abused" for many different purposes as it's so opaque to kubernetes. Sort of "extended resources with a class identifier instead of numerical capacity". So it could be "abused" in many scenarios where you need to assign key=value pairs (where value is an identifier string out of a known set).

At a quick thought, I think all of the three below would be at least somewhat applicable. 

> * using QoS class instead of node labels to indicate some features

Possibly, in some scenarios. However with labels you can be much more flexible with the different node affinity options (affinity/anti-affinity, required vs preferrred, complex match expressions etc

> * using QoS class like an alterative for pod and node affinity

Again, possibly in some scenarios but I think QoS resources (in the proposed form) would be quite limited wrt. existing options.

> * replacement of runtimehandler, priority class (better limiting of priority class pods)?

This is actually a quick thought I also had at some point but I haven't really done the homework to think this properly through. So maybe (some other people might have better idea about this)

> * if there will be external call during pod admission - can this be abused as generic pod admission plugin system?

We were not thinking about a separate pod admission call (e.g. in CRI) so I don't think this is currently applicable.

Author: changed wording "abused" -> "used"

DaemonSets, and I want that exact throttling values depend on the SSD model in
my heterogenous cluster.

#### Story 4

As a user I want to assign a low priority task into an (RDT) class that limits
the available memory bandwidth.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

The proposal only describes the details of implementation Phase 1 and some
parts like permission control are not covered. The
risk in this piecemeal approach is finding devil in the details, resulting in
inconsistent and/or crippled and/or cumbersome end result. However, the missing
parts are already outlined in [future work](#future-work) and there is aa lot
of experience in extending the API and understanding which sort of solutions
are functional and practical, mitigating the problem.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> - User assigning container to “unauthorized” class, causing interference and

Author: Point taken

     WindowsContainerResources windows = 2;
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    ContainerQoSResources qos_resources = 3;
```

#### RuntimeStatus

Extend the `RuntimeStatus` message with new `resources` field that is used to
communicate the available QoS-class resources from the runtime to the client.

This information can be used by the client (kubelet) to validate QoS-class
resource assignments before starting a pod. In future steps kubelet will patch
this information into node status.

```diff
 message RuntimeStatus {
     // List of current observed runtime conditions.
     repeated RuntimeCondition conditions = 1;
+    // Information about the discovered resources
+    ResourcesInfo resources = 2;
+}

+// ResourcesInfo contains information about the resources discovered by the
+// runtime.
+message ResourcesInfo {
+    // Pod-level QoS resources available.
+    repeated QoSResourceInfo pod_qos_resources = 1;
+    // Container-level QoS resources available.
+    repeated QoSResourceInfo container_qos_resources = 2;
+}

+// QoSResourceInfo contains information about one type of QoS resource.
+message QoSResourceInfo {
+    // Name of the QoS resources.

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 4: I'm going to sketch out something that could fit in with some imagined way to supersede [`kubernetes.io/ingress-bandwidth`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#kubernetes-io-ingress-bandwidth) and [`kubernetes.io/egress-bandwidth`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#kubernetes-io-egress-bandwidth) as annotations.

```yaml
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: qos-assignment-demo
  annotations:
    networkplugin.example.org/egress-ipqos-mark: throughput
    # network plugin config, not a QoS assignment
spec:
  qosAssignments: # pod level
    networkplugin.example.org/ingress-interface-class-name: shared
    networkplugin.example.org/egress-interface-class-name: throughput-1
    vendor.example/tdr-class: gold
  containers:
  - name: demo
    image: whatever:42
    resources:
      requests:
        kubernetes.io/egress-bits-per-second: 3M
        # an extended resource, not a QoS assignment
        # could plausibly be implemented per-container
      limits:
        kubernetes.io/egress-bits-per-second: 5M
        # also an extended resource, not a QoS assignment
    qosAssignments: # container level
      vendor.example/tdr-class: silver
      kubernetes.io/container-filesystem-storage-class: besteffort
```

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 4: > perhaps we make the "official" names be "naked", like we do for resources (e.g. "cpu" not "k8s.io/cpu").

IMO it's nice to leave a private namespace (unprefixed names) for cluster operators to use how they'd like to.

eg (building on my previous thinking)
```yaml
    qosAssignments:
      vendor.example/tdr-class: silver
      kubernetes.io/container-filesystem-storage-class: besteffort
      locally-maintained-log-write-ratelimiting-class: unrestricted # this bit
```

> +    string Name = 1;

Author: Thanks @sftim and @thockin on pondering this. I'm inclined to agree with you that it makes sense to specify some "official" well-known names, and probably also enforce the usage of them so that you cannot register names in the "official namespace" (be it unprefixed or with e.g. `k8s.io/` prefix I don't know and am probably indifferent myself) unless the name specified e.g. in the CRI API.

Will add some proposal about this to the KEP...

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 6: > IMO it's nice to leave a private namespace (unprefixed names) for cluster operators

We generally do this EXCEPT when it seems unlikely that cluster operators will be defining names very often.  The most obvious example is resources - if we had made everyone type "kubernetes.io/cpu" and "kubernetes.io/memory" it would have been obnoxious.  Cluster operators don't define resources, but other vendors do - e.g. `example.com/fancy-gpu`.  So It seemed "cpu" and "memory" was better.  

You can argue that it's inconsistent (it is) but it's aimed at making users do less boilerplate.

In this case it's not as obvious a win, but requiring the prefix now becomes the inconsistency - it's right next to "naked" names.  E.g. "cpu", "memory", "network", "iops" vs.  "cpu", "memory", "kubernetes.io/network", "kubernetes.io/iops"

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 4: I can see both perspectives. Maybe this is something to record as an unresolved point?

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 4: For beta, _if_ we use the “naked” names to mean things that Kubernetes recognizes, then I'd like to see admission-time checks on those names. (Leaving it 'til GA could set an accidental precedent that vendors can make up new ones).

> +    string Name = 1;

Author: > Maybe this is something to record as an unresolved point?

I can mark this as unresolved in the KEP. Even if I'm personally now inclined to agree with @thockin on this, after reading his reasoning.

> For beta, _if_ we use the “naked” names to mean things that Kubernetes recognizes, then I'd like to see admission-time checks on those names. (Leaving it 'til GA could set an accidental precedent that vendors can make up new ones).

Noted (will add to the KEP), sounds legit to me. Admission check on these is also a good point, getting an error early on that this is not a "known" resource

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 6: > I'd like to see admission-time checks on those names.

I don't think we do that for regular resources, do we?  Is it better to fail hard or to be accepted and pend until something comes along that offers that resource?

> +    string Name = 1;

Author: I think there is for the non-namespaced "official" resources, you cannot just request for `xpu: 1`. So I think a similar admission validation for "official" QoS resources would make sense. It wouldn't be possible to new "official" resources to appear out of the blue (at GA) as we'd require their names to be specified in the API.

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 6: Huh, you are correct:

```
spec.template.spec.containers[0].resources.requests[foobar]: Invalid value: "foobar": must be a standard resource type or fully qualified
```

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 3: @sftim Just a side comment:

> ```yaml
>  ...
>   containers:
>   - name: demo
>     image: whatever:42
>     resources:
>       requests:
>         kubernetes.io/egress-bits-per-second: 3M
>         # an extended resource, not a QoS assignment
>         # could plausibly be implemented per-container
>       limits:
>         kubernetes.io/egress-bits-per-second: 5M
>         # also an extended resource, not a QoS assignment
>     ...
> ```

the extended resources currently not allowing to be different in requests/limits. So, having different values there would not work. As well, extended resources are not currently passed down trough CRI, and work as simple counters inside kubelet. So, usage of those is very limited. Changing that behaviour might be beneficial to many use cases, but  that would also affect the device plugins and their usages (e.g. would be possible to do "optional" devices for containers with request e.g. gpu=0 limit gpu=1). And that's probably again story for separate KEP.

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 7: nitpicking on the example, you can't really do network-qos at the container level, can you?

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 4: > nitpicking on the example, you can't really do network-qos at the container level, can you?

iptables previously had a mechanism for matching packets to source processes, and it's plausible that something like that could return. Right now it wouldn't be easy to build though.

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 8: @aojea Network QoS is possible at the container level ( https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/net_prio.html ) and this question came up at our [Network QoS presentation](https://sched.co/11No0) at Open Source Summit in Austin last year. But we have not explored how well it works at the container level. The requirements we had at that time asked for traffic QoS at the pod level. I gathered a few use cases following that talk. Please see: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bMwi9P2t78zyfYu-wTVPoe8SZBjsQ6o73TcFMqIG0k8

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 7: > @aojea Network QoS is possible at the container level ( https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/net_prio.html ) an

fascinating, didn't know about that , thanks for the link

> the requirements we had at that time asked for traffic QoS at the pod level

I see, nice presentation ...  is there any reason to use rate-limiting at the container level, I assume most people will mean QoS as traffic prioritization as you show in your slides ...

also, rate limiting at the pod level has to be a very specific scenarios IMHO, you'll always want to use priorities for your traffic

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 8: Yes, in our PoC, we used dynamically tuned rate limiting as a way to limit the amount of bandwidth best effort traffic is allowed to use. Higher priority traffic classes were made possible through a combo of fast path kernel bypass (XDP_REDIRECT) and PRIO.

> +    string Name = 1;

Reviewer 8: One other thing that we didn't really get to validate is how well DiffServ QoS works in practice to provide true E2E network QoS. But I do of one company (not in the context of K8s) that's using eBPF to set DSCP codes similar to what we did in our PoC.

> +    string Name = 1;

Author: @thockin ^

> +    string Name = 1;

Author: ping @thockin ^

+    // Mutable is set to true if this resource supports in-place updates i.e.
+    // the class of a running container or sandbox can be changed.
+    bool Mutable = 2;
+    // List of classes of this QoS resource.

> +    repeated QoSResourceClassInfo classes = 3;

Author: I list this under the "Open Questions" section so TBH I'm not entirely sure 🧐 I think one possibility is is to leave it as an implementation detail of the QoS resource i.e. if nothing is specified the runtime just puts it into a "default" class whetever that is. But now that you asked it this way then probably it would make sense to make it possible to inform the user about the default.

> +    repeated QoSResourceClassInfo classes = 3;

Reviewer 6: I think there are 2 parts to this.  1) How do I (pod specifier) know what I got?  2) How do I (cluster admin) define the default?

> +    repeated QoSResourceClassInfo classes = 3;

Author: True.

For 1) I think I need to cook up something. Still need to think about the details. E.g. dynamic configuration updates of the QoS resources, I think it would be possible that the default is changed -> users might get wrong information if the default is changed after a pod (using default) is created.

For 2) I feel that we could rely on the QoS resource configuration on the runtime side and then use e.g. limitranges or admission webhooks to supplement that if needed.

+}

+// QoSResourceClassInfo contains information about one class of certain
+// QoS resource.
+message QoSResourceClassInfo {
+    // Name of the class
+    string name = 1;
+    // Capacity is the number of maximum allowed simultaneous assignments into this class
+    // Zero means "infinite" capacity i.e. the usage is not restricted.
+    uint64 capacity = 2;
 }
```

#### Consts

> Also, define "known" QoS-class resource types to more easily align container

Author: Noted, thanks 👍 As commented above I think it makes sense to enforce the usage of names in the "official" namespace

runtime implementations:

```diff
+const (
+       // QoSResourceRdt is the name of the RDT QoS-class resource
+       QoSResourceRdt = "rdt"
+       // QoSResourceBlockio is the name of the blockio QoS-class resource
+       QoSResourceBlockio = "blockio"
+)
```

### Kubernetes API

The PodSpec will be extended to support assignment of pod-level and
container-level QoS-class devices. NodeStatus will be extended to include
information about the available QoS-class resources on a node.

#### PodSpec

We introduce a new field, QoSResources into the existing ResourceRequirements
struct. This will enable the assignment of QoS resources for containers.

```diff
 type ResourceRequirements struct {
        // Limits describes the maximum amount of compute resources allowed.
@@ -2195,6 +2198,10 @@ type ResourceRequirements struct {
        // +featureGate=DynamicResourceAllocation
        // +optional
        Claims []ResourceClaim
+       // QoSResources specifies the QoS resources.
+       // +optional

> +       QoSResources map[QoSResourceName]string

Reviewer 6: I'm not loving this name, but we can argue that later.

Author: Naming is hard 🥸 I'm really open to suggestions. Just changed the naming recently (IMO in better direction) after feedback from @vinaykul

Reviewer 6: names can evolve during impl

 }

+// QoSResourceName is the name of a QoS resource.
+type QoSResourceName string
```

Also, we add a Resources field to the PodSpec, to enable assignment of

> pod-level QoS resources. We will re-use the existing ResourceRequirements type

Reviewer 6: Let's not re-use types when we don't have to.  Make it a subset of the container schema, so we can align with pod-level resources if/when they happen, but don't add fields that users can't use.

Author: > Let's not re-use types when we don't have to. Make it a subset of the container schema, so we can align with pod-level resources if/when they happen, but don't add fields that users can't use.

Good comment 👍 Any suggestions here? What I was thinking how to align with the recent DRA claims field in the pod spec. I.e. similarly propose a plain `qosResources` field in the PodSpec or specify a separate `PodResourceRequirements` struct to include possible other types of future pod resources?

Reviewer 6: I would define 2 structs with the same (or almost the same) fields - one for Pod and one for Container.  It makes them a LITTLE harder to consume in code but we have been burned so many times by re-using types that I think it's better not to at all.

Author: K. In the proposal it was basically just a simple map[string]string (to sort of align with the old resource limits and requests)

```golang
type QoSResourceRequest struct {
        Name string
}
```

and something like this for the ResourceRequirements

```diff
+       QoSResources []QoSResourceRequest
 }
```

and ditto for pod-level resources

Author: @thockin this was changed as suggested

In Container:

```diff
 type ResourceRequirements struct {
...
        Claims []ResourceClaim
+       // QOSResources specifies the requested QoS resources.
+       // +optional
+       QOSResources []QOSResourceRequest
 }

+// QOSResourceRequest specifies a request for one QoS resource type.
+type QOSResourceRequest struct {
+       // Name of the QoS resource.
+       Name QOSResourceName
+       // Name of the class (inside the QoS resource type specified by Name field).
+       Class string
+}
```

And in PodSpec as a new field

```diff
 type PodSpec struct {
...
        ResourceClaims []PodResourceClaim
+       QOSResources []PodQOSResourceRequest
 }

+// PodQOSResourceRequest specifies a request for one QoS resource type for a
+// Pod.
+type PodQOSResourceRequest struct {
+       // Name of the QoS resource.
+       Name QOSResourceName
+       // Name of the class (inside the QoS resource type specified by Name field).
+       Class string
+}

but Limits and Requests and Claims must be left empty. QoSResources may be set
and they represent the Pod-level assignment of QoS-class resources,
corresponding the PodQoSResources message in PodSandboxConfig in the CRI
API.

```diff
 type PodSpec struct {
@@ -3062,6 +3069,10 @@ type PodSpec struct {
        ResourceClaims []PodResourceClaim
+       // Pod-level resources. Claims, requests and limits are not allowed
+       // to be specified for pods.
+       // +optional
+       Resources ResourceRequirements
 }
```

There is already an ongoing effort to add [Pod level resource limits][kep-2837]
that aims at adding a pod level `Resources` field in a similar fashion. Thus,
we opt for adding ResourceRequirements insted of QoSResources directly into the
PodSpec.

As an example, a Pod requesting class "fast" of a (exemplary) pod-level QoS
resource named "network", with one container requesting class "gold" of
container-level QoS resource named "rdt":

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: qos-resource-example
spec:
  resources:
    qosResources:

>       network: fast

Reviewer 6: What happens if I ask for a resource or class that doesn't exist?  I just never get scheduled?

What happens if I ask for a resource or class that doesn't exist *and* I set `nodeName`?  Does kubelet reject it?  That will need good tests.

I asked above - what do I get for "network" if I don't specify anything?  How do I know what I got?   Do we need to add parallel status fields to indicate the defaults?

Author: > What happens if I ask for a resource or class that doesn't exist? I just never get scheduled?

Yes, that's what happens. Lingering in pending state until a node with that resource&class becomes available in the cluster.

> What happens if I ask for a resource or class that doesn't exist _and_ I set `nodeName`? Does kubelet reject it? That will need good tests.

Pod admission in kubelet will fail. Tests noted.

> I asked above - what do I get for "network" if I don't specify anything? How do I know what I got? Do we need to add parallel status fields to indicate the defaults?

This is a good question. Need to sleep over and re-think the case of defaults now that you brought it up. As said it's in open questions so I've been undecided on this

Reviewer 6: Adding to the idea of status fields:

In my mental model (and please tell me if I am wrong), once to take a resource and define QoS bands, *all* containers/pods are in a band - there's no such things as being in *no* QoS class.  Example:

If I don't define cache classes, all my pods are in the same "unnamed default" class.  As soon as I define a "gold" class, there are some pods in "gold" and some in the "unnamed default" class.

a) Is it OK to have pods/containers in the unnamed default class?  What are the behavioral characteristics of that class?  Or should that default class get an actual name?  You can't have "fast" without "not fast".

b) How do we tell a user they are in the "unnamed default" class?

c) Assume I have some running pods, and then I SSH into the node and activate a new qos-resource "foo" with classes "diamond" and "glass".  All my running pods were unaware of "foo" at all.  Their pod specs *can't* ask for a foo class (because that didn't exist) and so their statuses do not indicate "foo".  But now "foo" **does** exist - do we put them all into a class (which one?) and do we update their statuses?

Author: > In my mental model (and please tell me if I am wrong), once to take a resource and define QoS bands, _all_ containers/pods are in a band - there's no such things as being in _no_ QoS class. 

You're right. I think it's built-in property that you always belong to some class. E.g. in the case of cache, as you mentioned, all applications need some cache. If no cache management is enabled all processes belong to an implicit "unrestricted" class. Another example: you can have a QoS resource that only specifies some throttling parameters -> if you don't specify anything, you don't get any throttling so belong to an implicit "unlimited" class.

> a) Is it OK to have pods/containers in the unnamed default class? What are the behavioral characteristics of that class? Or should that default class get an actual name? You can't have "fast" without "not fast".

This is something that I'm now trying to form an educated opinion on (as said, the subject is under "open questions" section in the KEP atm). In the current proposal (and my current POC implementation) it is like that. I.e. pods/containers can have (and have) unnamed defaults, what really happens is an implementation detail of the QoS resource in the runtime.
 
> b) How do we tell a user they are in the "unnamed default" class?

Probably one option is to leave it on the pod spec. Somewhat similar to pod PriorityClasses, but in this case what the default really means would be an "implementation detail" in the runtime. Another way could be a new field in pod status, a field which would be filled based on information received from the container runtime.
 
> c) Assume I have some running pods, and then I SSH into the node and activate a new qos-resource "foo" with classes "diamond" and "glass". All my running pods were unaware of "foo" at all. Their pod specs _can't_ ask for a foo class (because that didn't exist) and so their statuses do not indicate "foo". But now "foo" **does** exist - do we put them all into a class (which one?) and do we update their statuses?

I think where to put existing containers must be handled by the runtime. But that could be reflected in the pod status.  I think it can also be possible in some scenarios that when enabling a new QoS resource (while pods are already running) that existing pods/containers are left into some pre-existing implicit default class that is not available anymore because the pod/container cannot be reconfigured after the fact - think about e.g. some vm-based containers or containers running in secure enclaves.

In any case, I'm open to other perspectives and good suggestions in this area.

Reviewer 6: > But that could be reflected in the pod status. 

The implication here is that kubelet recognizes that it has a new qos-resource available, and must query the runtime "which class is this container in", and then post a staus update to each pod on the node.  That will almost certainly be an explicit code path and tests.

Author: Kubelet is polling the pod status at short intervals (in the order of seconds) so it gets quickly updated even with the current code paths

available within each of these resource types.

```diff
 type NodeStatus struct {
@@ -4444,6 +4482,11 @@ type NodeStatus struct {
        // Status of the config assigned to the node via the dynamic Kubelet config feature.
        Config *NodeConfigStatus
+       // QoSResources contains information about the QoS resources that are
+       // available on the node.
+       // +featureGate=QoSResources
+       // +optional
+       QoSResources QoSResourceStatus
 }

...

+// QoSResourceStatus describes QoS resources available on the node.
+type QoSResourceStatus struct {
+       // PodQoSResources contains the QoS resources that are available for pods
+       // to be assigned to.
+       PodQoSResources []QoSResourceInfo
+       // ContainerQoSResources contains the QoS resources that are available for
+       // containers to be assigned to.
+       ContainerQoSResources []QoSResourceInfo
+}

+// QoSResourceInfo contains information about one QoS resource type.
+type QoSResourceInfo struct {
+       // Name of the resource.
+       Name QoSResourceName
+       // Mutable is set to true if the resource supports in-place updates.

> +       Mutable bool

Reviewer 6: What happens if a class is removed while pods are using it?

Author: I [replied](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3004#issuecomment-1414043336) to @SergeyKanzhelev regarding pod evicition. I think we should treat QoS resources similarly to extended resources (but I'm now unsure how that behaves). For the current usage scenarios pod eviction hasn't been "interesting" but maybe it will be for others. -> will add this to the future work section

Author: ping @thockin ^

+       // Classes available for assignment.
+       Classes []QoSResourceClassInfo
+}

+// QoSResourceClassInfo contains information about single class of one QoS
+// resource.
+type QoSResourceClassInfo struct {
+       // Name of the class.
+       Name string
+       // Capacity is the number of maximum allowed simultaneous assignments into this class
+       // Zero means "infinite" capacity i.e. the usage is not restricted
+       // +optional
+       Capacity int64
+}

> ```

Reviewer 6: We discussed this on the call, but capturing here.

Consider adding a `QoSClass` API resource.  It doesn't need to be very rich, just a resource name and class name, maybe.  This lets end-users know that, as a cluster admin you intended for this class to exist.  Also, they can then `kubectl get qosclass` and see what they have available.    Depending on how we answer defaults, maybe this helps there too?

@msau42 brought this up and had another argument, but I failed to capture it in my notes...

Reviewer 9: The scenario I was thinking was also on the "portability" question, but instead of kubernetes defining the semantics of what the resource means with well-known names, what if it can be admin-defined?

For example, what if different runtimes or different hardware vendors have different, but close-enough implementations of "cache-line"? A platform admin who's providing a PaaS to their users wants to define a portable class that could be leveraged on all the hardware platforms they support. So maybe they would want to define their own "cache" class, and then be able to specify some mapping that "cache/gold" can be satisfied by "rdt/gold" or "foo/gold", "cache/silver" maps to "foo/silver", etc.

Reviewer 6: FWIW I am still not sure about this aspect - maybe mark it as UNRESOLVED in the KEP and we can revisit as we get more clarity?

Author: @thockin can you confirm what you actually want to be marked as unresolved? I hastily read your comment and marked the Capacity field in QOSResourceClassInfo as unresolved but I don't think that's what you wanted. If I'm not mistaken you want to add a section about a separate QOSClass (and QOSResource?) K8s API objects and mark that as unresolved(?)

Author: ping @thockin ^

request against the resource availability on the node. Pod is rejected if
sufficient resources do not exist.

Invalid class assignments will cause an error in the container runtime which
causes the corresponding CRI RuntimeService request (e.g.  RunPodSandbox or
CreateContainer) to fail with an error. This can happen, despite the admission
check, e.g. when the requested QoS-class resource is not available on the
runtime (e.g. kubelet sends the pod or container start request before getting
an update of changed QoS-class resource availability from the runtime).

A feature gate QoSResources enables kubelet to interpretthe specific pod
annotations. If the feature gate is disabled the annotations are simply ignored
by kubelet.

### API server

Input validation of QoS-class resource names and class names, very similar to
labels is implemented: keys (`QoSResourceName`) and values must be non-empty,
less than 64 characters long, must start and end with an alphanumeric character
and may contain only alphanumeric characters, dashes, underscores or dots (`-`,
`_` or `.`). Also similar to labels, a namespace prefix (FQDN subdomain separated

> with a slash) in the key is allowed (e.g. `vendor/qos-resource`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
with a slash) in the key is allowed (e.g. `vendor.example/qos-resource`).
```

We expect subdomains in this kind of key to contain at least one `.`

Author: Fixed

satisfy all of the requests the Pod is marked as unschedulable and will be
scheduled in the future when/if requests can be satisfied by some node.

In principle, scheduling will behave similarly to native and extended
resources. The kube-scheduler will also take in account the per-class capacity
on the nodes if that is provided.

### Kubectl

The kubectl describe command will be extended to:

- available QoS-class resources of nodes
- display QoS-class resource requests of pods

### Container runtimes

Currently, there is support (container-level QoS-class resources) for Intel RDT
and blockio in CRI-O and containerd runtimes:

- cri-o:
  - [~~Add support for Intel RDT~~](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/4830)
  - [~~Support for cgroups blockio~~](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/4873)
- containerd:
  - [~~Support Intel RDT~~](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/pull/5439)
  - [~~Support for cgroups blockio~~](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/pull/5490)

The design paradigm here is that the container runtime configures the QoS-class
resources according to a given configuration file. Enforcement on containers is

> done via OCI. User interface is provided through pod and container annotations.

Reviewer 4: Does this mean we couldn't specify QoS assignments for networking (not handled by the CRI) or other aspects of a Pod?

Author: No. CRI API is only used to carry the information what class a pod or container was assigned to. How it is enforced in the container runtime can be anything. E.g. in the case of network it can hook into the network setup phase of pod sandbox creation (at that time it already knows what "network" class the pod was assigned to)

Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Pod annotations

Instead of updating CRI and Kubernetes API in lock-step, the API changes could
be split into two phases. Similar to e.g. how seccomp support was added, Pod
annotations could be used as an initial user interface before the Kubernetes
API changes are merged.

Specifically, annotations for specifying RDT and blockio class would be
supported. These are the two types of QoS-class resources that already have
basic support in the container runtimes.

- `rdt.resources.alpha.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default RDT
  class for all containers
- `rdt.resources.alpha.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for
  container-specific RDT class settings
  blockio class for all containers
- `blockio.resources.alpha.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default
  blockio class for all containers
- `blockio.resources.alpha.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for

>   container-specific blockio class settings

Reviewer 4: BTW, we don't put “alpha” or ”beta” in annotation keys.

Author: K, noted

Author: Dropped `alpha`

updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

Add support to Kubernetes for declaring _quality-of-service_ resources, and
assigning these to Pods. A quality-of-service (QoS-class) resource is similar
to other Kubernetes resource types (i.e. native resources such as `cpu` and
`memory` or extended resources) because you can assign that resource to a
particular container. However, QoS-class resources are also different from
those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,
rather than to declare a specific amount of capacity that is allocated.

Main characteristics of the new resource type (and the technologies they are
aimed at enabling) are:

- multiple containers can be assigned to the same class of a certain type of
  QoS-class resource
- QoS-class resources are represented by an enumerable set of class identifiers
- each type of QoS-class resource has an independent set of class identifiers

With QoS-class resources, Pods and their containers can request opaque
QoS-class identifiers (classes) of certain QoS mechanism (QoS-class resource

> type). Kubelet relays this information to the container runtime, without

Author: Good point here. I added the following 
```
Being opaque to Kubernetes means that QoS-class resources have to be
supported by the container runtime as it is responsible for the actual low-level
management of them.
```

Better?

currently no meaningful way to support these technologies in Kubernetes. This
proposal suggests to address the issue above in a generalized way by extending
the Kubernetes resource model with a new type of resources, i.e. QoS-class
resources.

This KEP identifies two technologies that can immediately be enabled with
QoS-class resources. However, these are just two examples  and the proposed
changes are generic (and not tied to these two QoS-class resource types in any
way), making it easier to implement new QoS-class resource types.

[Intel RDT][intel-rdt] implements a class-based mechanism for controlling the
cache and memory bandwidth QoS of applications. All processes in the same
hardware class share a portion of cache lines and memory bandwidth. RDT
provides a way for mitigating noisy neighbors and fulfilling SLAs. In Linux
control happens via resctrl -- a pseudo-filesystem provided by the kernel which
makes it virtually agnostic of the hardware architecture. The OCI runtime-spec
has supported Intel RDT for a while already. Other hardware vendors have
comparable technologies which use the same [resctrl interface][linux-resctrl].

> The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying

Author: This is probably the best example of the configuration: https://github.com/intel/goresctrl/blob/main/doc/blockio.md

It can be used for anything seen as block device storage by the kernel. Basically local disks. The configuration supports globbing (for device paths) but is sort of fixed as it's specified in a configuration file

> The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying

Reviewer 10: @marquiz looks interesting, I was also looking for same sort of solution to support the QOS for block devices, We do have cephcsi driver which maps the rbd image as a block device, With this KEP is it possible to set the QOS for the device created as part of csi driver and mount it just a filesystem/block PVC to the application pod?  As the devices get created dynamically by the csi driver (with random device numbers) when mounting the PVC how admin can pre-create the class and set QoS for these devices? sorry if my question is confusing

> The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying

Author: @Madhu-1 yes, that should work. However, there is a caveat that if you have also some other CSI providers exposing the volumes as rbd devices, those would also get throttled (in case you only wanted to throttle the cephcsi volumes). 

As a note: I think the eventual end goal would be to implement the blockio as an [NRI](https://github.com/containerd/nri) plugin. The plugin would get all relevant information (about volumes etc) at container creation time and set cgroup parameters for the exact devices that we want without any globbing.

> The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying

Reviewer 10: @marquiz got it, if we have any application pod that doesn't have any class name set but is using the RBD PVC , Will those pods will also get affected by this as the device mapped will come in the range specified above or limits get applied to the pod which is having only the class set (based on the class name) in the yaml.

> The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying

Author: > if we have any application pod that doesn't have any class name set but is using the RBD PVC , Will those pods will also get affected by this as the device mapped will come in the range specified above or limits get applied to the pod which is having only the class set (based on the class name) in the yaml.

@Madhu-1 no, only those pods that have requested the class will be affected by this class.

> The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying

Reviewer 10: got it, Thank you @marquiz for the confirmation.

> The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying

Reviewer 10: @marquiz one last questions 🗡️ will this work on both cgroup v1 and cgroup v2? or it works only with cgroup v2

> The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying

Reviewer 10: @marquiz in case if you have missed the above question.

all the future steps to not lose the overall big picture.

The figure below illustrates the design of implementation phase 1. The first
implementation phase covers the communication between kubelet and the container
runtime (i.e. CRI API) and Kubernetes API for NodeStatus and PodSpec and their
respecive implementations (kubelet and kube-scheduler). Access control (e.g.
resource quota) is left to future work. This KEP (the [Proposal](#proposal) and
[Design Details](#design-details)) in its current form implements this first
phase.

![design](./design.svg)

QoS-class resources are designed to be opaque to the CRI client in the sense
that the container runtime takes care of configuration and control of the
resources and the classes within.

### Phase 1

The goal is to enable a functional base for users to leverage QoS-class
resources and start experimenting with them in Kubernetes:

- extend the CRI protocol to allow QoS-class resource assignment and updates to
  be communicated from kubelet to the runtime
- extend the CRI protocol to allow runtime to communicate available QoS-class
  resources (the types of resources and the classes within) to kubelet

> - implement pod annotations as an initial user interface

Author: Woops, yes definitely. Removed

(see [implementation phases](#implementation-phases) for an outline of all
planned changes).

Configuration and management of the QoS-class resources is fully handled by the
underlying container runtime and is invisible to kubelet. An error to the CRI
client is returned if the specified class is not available.

### CRI API

The following additions to the CRI protocol are suggested.

#### ContainerConfig

The `ContainerConfig` message will be supplemented with new `class_resources`
field, providing per-container setting for QoS-class resources. This will be
used in `CreateContainerRequest` to communicate the container-level QoS-class
resource assignments to the runtime.

```diff
 message ContainerConfig {

 ...
     // Configuration specific to Linux containers.
     LinuxContainerConfig linux = 15;
     // Configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
+
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    ContainerQoSResources qos_resources = 17;
 }

+// ContainerQoSResources specifies the configuration of QoS resources of a
+// container.
+message ContainerQoSResources {
+    // QoS resources the container will be assigned to.

> +    map<string, string> classes = 1;

Author: Key = resource name
Value = class name

I added a description in the KEP.

> +    map<string, string> classes = 1;

Author: Now that I look at it maybe we should change the name of the field to smth else 🧐

+    uint64 capacity = 2;
 }
```

#### Consts

Also, define "known" QoS-class resource types to more easily align container
runtime implementations:

```diff
+const (
+       // QoSResourceRdt is the name of the RDT QoS-class resource
+       QoSResourceRdt = "rdt"
+       // QoSResourceBlockio is the name of the blockio QoS-class resource
+       QoSResourceBlockio = "blockio"
+)
```

### Kubernetes API

The PodSpec will be extended to support assignment of pod-level and
container-level QoS-class devices. NodeStatus will be extended to include
information about the available QoS-class resources on a node.

#### PodSpec

We introduce a new field, QoSResources into the existing ResourceRequirements
struct. This will enable the assignment of QoS resources for containers.

```diff
 type ResourceRequirements struct {
        // Limits describes the maximum amount of compute resources allowed.
@@ -2195,6 +2198,10 @@ type ResourceRequirements struct {
        // +featureGate=DynamicResourceAllocation
        // +optional
        Claims []ResourceClaim
+       // QoSResources specifies the QoS resources.
+       // +optional

> +       QoSResources map[QoSResourceName]string

Author: Same here. Key is the name of the resource and value is the name of the class. I added an example Pod to the KEP

> +       QoSResources map[QoSResourceName]string

Author: This has been changed to it's own type with named fields. Also an example has been added

   +        // pods to be assigned to.
   +        PodClassResources []ClassResourceInfo
   +        // ContainerClassResources contains the class resources that are available
   +        // for containers to be assigned to.
   +        ContainerClassResources []ClassResourceInfo
   +}

   +// ClassResourceInfo contains information about one class resource type.
   +type ClassResourceInfo struct {
   +        // Name of the resource.
   +        Name ClassResourceName
   +        // Mutable is set to true if the resource supports in-place updates.
   +        Mutable bool
   +        // Classes available for assignment.
   +        Classes []ClassResourceClassInfo
   +}

   +// ClassResourceClassInfo contains information about single class of one
   +// QoS-class resource.
   +type ClassResourceClassInfo struct {
   +        Name string
   +}
   ```
1. Separate API objects (e.g. something like `RuntimeClass`). Doesn't
   necessarily that neatly align with two level hierarchy (resource name and a
   set of classes within). Also, only best suited to homogenous clusters.

#### Access control

This future step adds support for controlling the access to available QoS-class
resources.

> If QoS-class resources were advertised as API objects the natural access

Author: You're right. I now dropped speculation on separate API objects.

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

- User assigning container to “unauthorized” class, causing interference and
  access to unwanted set/amount of resources. This will be addressed in future
  KEP introducing permission controls.
- Confusion: user tries to assign container to RDT class but RDT has not been
  enabled on system(s). This will be addressed by future KEP(s) introducing
  resource availability status.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The detailed design presented here covers [implementation phase 1](#phase-1)
(see [implementation phases](#implementation-phases) for an outline of all
planned changes).

Configuration and management of the QoS-class resources is fully handled by the
underlying container runtime and is invisible to kubelet. An error to the CRI
client is returned if the specified class is not available.

> ### CRI protocol

Author: To my best knowledge that kind of field management hasn't been done in the CRI API. The version-skew problems between kubelet and runtime versions might become really hard to handle. Thus, making backwards-incompatible changes would need to be handled by defining new fields. @mrunalp might be able to give some education on this subject.

+    map<string, string> class = 1;
+}
```

#### RuntimeStatus

Extend the `RuntimeStatus` message with new `resources` field that is used to
communicate the available QoS-class resources from the runtime to the client.

This information can be used by the client (kubelet) to validate QoS-class
resource assignments before starting a pod. In future steps kubelet will patch
this information into node status.

```diff
 message RuntimeStatus {
     // List of current observed runtime conditions.
     repeated RuntimeCondition conditions = 1;
+    // Information about the discovered resources
+    ResourcesInfo resources = 2;
+}

+// ResourcesInfo contains information about the resources discovered by the
+// runtime.
+message ResourcesInfo {
+    // Pod-level QoS-class resources available.
+    repeated ClassResourceInfo pod_class_resources = 1;
+    // Container-level QoS-class resources available.
+    repeated ClassResourceInfo container_class_resources = 2;
+}

+// ClassResourceInfo contains information about one type of class resource.
+message ClassResourceInfo {
+    // Name of the QoS-class resources.
+    string Name = 1;

> +    // Mutable is set to true if this resource sypports dynamic updates.

Author: The former. I changed the comment now to

```
+       // Mutable is set to true if this resource supports in-place updates i.e.
+       // the class of a running container or sandbox can be changed.
```

Hopefully makes it easier to understand

+    bool Mutable = 2;
+    // List of classes of this resource.
+    repeated ClassResourceClassInfo classes = 3;
+}

+// ClassResourceClassInfo contains information about single class of one
+// QoS-class resource type.
+message ClassResourceClassInfo {
+    string Name = 1;
 }
```

#### Consts

Also, define "known" QoS-class resource types to more easily align container
runtime implementations:

```diff

> +const (

Author: > If a particular runtime wants to define it's own resource that other runtimes don't support, does it need to add the resource to the list here?

No, that was not the intention.

Or is this mainly a way to provide some portability across runtimes for some common scenarios?

Yes, that was the thinking. This could be also moved elsewhere. I don't know if there's any good place to share these kind of definitions between runtimes, though 🤔

+       // ClassResourceRdt is the name of the RDT QoS-class resource
+       ClassResourceRdt = "rdt"
+       // ClassResourceBlockio is the name of the blockio QoS-class resource
+       ClassResourceBlockio = "blockio"
+)
```

### Pod annotations

Use Pod annotation as the initial K8s user interface, similar to e.g. how
seccomp support was added. This will bridge the gap between the first
implementation phase, i.e. enabling QoS-class resources in the CRI protocol,
and the future work which makes them available in the Pod spec.

Specifically, annotations for specifying RDT and blockio class will be
supported. These are the two types of QoS-class resources that already have
basic support in the container runtimes.

> - `rdt.resources.alpha.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default RDT

Author: I now dropped the annotation-based UX for good because many (or most) of the commenters disliked it

> - `rdt.resources.alpha.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default RDT

Author: > Do you see a use case in defining defaults across all pods in a cluster?

@msau42  I think limit ranges would be close enough for that (per-namespace). Other than that the default will basically be configured per-node in each node's runtime config

translate them into corresponding `ClassResources` data in the CRI
ContainerConfig message at container creation time (CreateContainerRequest).
Pod-level QoS-class resources are not supported at this point (via pod
annotations).

Kubelet will receive the information about available QoS-class resources (the
types of reqources and their classes) from the runtime over the CRI API (new
Resources field in RuntimeStatus message). An admission handler is added to
kubelet to validate the QoS-class resource request against the resource
availability on the node. Pod is rejected if sufficient resources do not exist.

A feature gate ClassResources enables kubelet to interpretthe specific pod
annotations. If the feature gate is disabled the annotations are simply ignored
by kubelet.

### API server

A validation check (core api validation) is added in the API server to reject
changes to the QoS-class resource specific [pod annotations](#pod-annotations)
after a Pod has been created. This ensures that the annotations always reflect
the actual assignment of QoS-class resources of a Pod. It also serves as part
of the UX to indicate the in-place updates of the resources via annotations is

> not supported.

Author: > The proposal extends CRI calls to update a container's resource request, but here we're saying Pod updates are not supported in the k8s API. Is this an initial restriction that we plan to relax in the future?

Pod sandbox updates are not currently supported by the CRI API. For containers there is `UpdateContainerResources` endpoint in the API and we propose to extend that. But for sandboxes there is nothing similar so we propose to address that separately to narrow down the scope of the KEP (first implementation phase). And yes, we're planning to address that in the future implementation phases.

Adding "class capacity" to the APIs could be a separate future implementation
phase if it is not desired in the first round of API changes.

###### CRI

Add capacity both to resource discovery.

```diff
 message ClassResourceClassInfo {
     // Name of the class
     string name = 1;
+    // Capacity is the number of maximum allowed simultaneous assignments into this class
+    // Zero means "infinite" capacity i.e. the usage is not restricted.
+    uint64 capacity = 2;
+
 }
```

###### NodeStatus

Corresponding to the CRI changes, class capacity would be added to the class
info in NodeStatus.

```diff
 type ClassResourceClassInfo struct {
        // Name of the class.
        Name string
+       // Capacity is the number of maximum allowed simultaneous assignments into this class
+       // Zero means "infinite" capacity i.e. the usage is not restricted
+       // +optional
+       Capacity int64
 }
```

###### ResourceQuotaSpec

ResourceQuota would be supplemented similarly.

```diff
 type AllowedClass struct {
        // Name of the class.
        Name string
+       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.
+       // +optional
+       Capacity int64
 }
```

> It is worth noting that this change in ResourceQuota is independent from the

Author: Agree. "class capacity" is now added to the KEP. I also added "class capacity" separately to the speculated ResourceQuota extensions in future work.

`memory` or extended resources) because you can assign that resource to a
particular container. However, QoS-class resources are also different from
those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,
rather than to declare a specific amount of capacity that is allocated.

Main characteristics of the new resource type (and the technologies they are
aimed at enabling) are:

- multiple containers can be assigned to the same class of a certain type of
  QoS-class resource
- QoS-class resources are represented by an enumerable set of class identifiers
- each type of QoS-class resource has an independent set of class identifiers

With QoS-class resources, Pods and their containers can request opaque
QoS-class identifiers (classes) of certain QoS mechanism (QoS-class resource
type). Kubelet relays this information to the container runtime, without
directing how the request is enforced in the underlying system. Being opaque to
Kubernetes means that QoS-class resources have to be supported by the container
runtime as it is responsible for the actual low-level management of them.

## Motivation

> <!--

Reviewer 6: FWIW you can strip out these comments and make your KEP file smaller

Author: Point taken. Removed some of those but still left some (for my own guidance)

permission controls.

It seems necessary to support both container-level and pod-level QoS-class
resources as independent concepts. Intel RDT (above) is per-container by
design because of the hardware implementation (the control/class hiearchy is
flat). Also, the current support for blockio is container-level only (it is not
possible to configure pod sandbox-level cgroup parameters). However, having
pod-level QoS-class resources makes it possible to implement support for
sandbox-level blockio parameters. Other usage for pod sandbox-level QoS-class
resources would be communicating the Kubernetes Pod QoS class from
kubelet to the container runtime.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Make it possible to request QoS-class resources
  - Support RDT class assignment of containers. This is already supported by
    the containerd and CRI-O runtime and part of the OCI runtime-spec
  - Support blockio class assignment of containers.
  - Support Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resources
- Make the API to support updating QoS-class resource assignment of running containers

> - Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other QoS-class

Author: > I think we need to prove that this mechanism is viable for a broader array of resource types, even if we don't fully implement them all.

Mm, agree on this.

> For example, it seems like we should be able to use this to define different levels of memory reclaim aggressiveness

If you refer to `memory.swap.*` controls in cgroups v2 (or other new memory controls in v2) I think this would certainly be a viable usage scenario. This would be "hiding" the actual detailed memory related parameters (configured by the administrator) behind a set of class names. Kubelet would not know anything about the detailed cgroup knobs, just the class name and the container runtime would enforce these via the oci runtime spec (for container cgroups).

> different priority access to "extra" CPUs

Could you elaborate on this a bit? Like priority access to extra cpu cycles or "priority" cpu cores. On top of my head, regarding cpu core priorities, one could e.g. boost exclusively allocated cpus of "high-prio" containers through the systfs cpufreq controls (and throttle "low-prio" ones).
 
> Mostly I just want to make sure we think through how those probably would look - not implement them all.

I think one place where to ponder these could be the *User Stories* section that I commented above (in response to @SergeyKanzhelev) being very much lacking. Need to sleep over this and update the KEP tomorrow...

> - Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other QoS-class

Reviewer 4: If we could get some plausible-looking manifests and other examples for the different cases, I think that'd help.

> - Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other QoS-class

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2570-memory-qos sets a throttle factor of 0.8, but maybe "gold" pods get a .8, while "silver" gets 0.5 and "bronze" gets 0.25.

> Kubelet would not know anything about the detailed cgroup knobs, just the class name and the container runtime would enforce these

This is a good point - the aKEP linked above is Kubelet, not the runtime.  It's the "outer" pod cgroup that needs this config.  Should it be possible for kubelet to augment the qos-resources offered by the runtime and add its own?  It would be a shame to add another mechanism to solve the same shape of problem.

> - Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other QoS-class

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2570-memory-qos sets a throttle factor of 0.8, but maybe "gold" pods get a .8, while "silver" gets 0.5 and "bronze" gets 0.25.

> Kubelet would not know anything about the detailed cgroup knobs, just the class name and the container runtime would enforce these

This is a good point - the aKEP linked above is Kubelet, not the runtime.  It's the "outer" pod cgroup that needs this config.  Should it be possible for kubelet to augment the qos-resources offered by the runtime and add its own?  It would be a shame to add another mechanism to solve the same shape of problem.

> - Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other QoS-class

Author: I think that would be possible and nothing super complex in terms of implementation (when it comes to the scope of this particular KEP i.e. just the API changes). Especially when/if we control/enforce "official" names we could reserve some for kubelet-owned resources.

Actually, this is already envisioned in the KEP under open questions (Pod QoS class) - QoS resources could be used to communicate the Pod QoS class to the runtime. Information they (the runtimes) already want and use but use some kludge-ish cgroup-path-based detection to determine it.

Anyway, I'll mention this as a possible scenario in the KEP. A little bit of side-track (wrt. this KEP), but regarding Pod cgroup handling I've had a secret wish that maybe we could find a way to move that out of kubelet to the runtimes, too 😇

  resource types in the future.
- Make QoS-class resources opqaue (as possible) to the CRI client
- Discovery of the available QoS-class resources

> - API changes to support updating Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resource

Author: > Is update really a requirement? I'll be looking for details about why.

The reasoning would be symmetry: if update of running containers is possible, make it also possible for pod-level resources at least on CRI API level. Relates to being able to "fully" support [in-place pod vertical scaling](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources)

> - API changes to support updating Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resource

Reviewer 6: Scaling and changing QoS class are two very different things.  In-place scaling does not change your pod's QoS class, even if the new settings would result in a different QoS upon CREATE.

Update is known to be extremely challenging - I'd push back on that work until it is REALLY critical and has strong use-cases.

> - API changes to support updating Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resource

Author: Yeah, I think I agree with this. Getting runtimes to support a new "UpdateSandbox" CRI endpoint won't be a walk in the park. I originally had this in the backlog as a separate KEP but then it slipped here at some point (to not forget about it and list everything in one place). I'll remove this from the goals and handle it separately at a later time as a separate KEP.

> - API changes to support updating Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resource

Author: removed, @thockin ^

  assignment of running pods
- Resource status/capacity
- Access control ([future work](#future-work))

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Interface or mechanism for configuring the QoS-class resources (responsibility of
  the container runtime).

> - Enumerating possible (QoS-class) resource types or their detailed behavior

Author: My bad English skills. What I tried to say is not fixing in the API (or in the KEP) the resource types/names that are supported. I.e. when somebody comes up with a new type of (or vendor-specific) QoS resource it will be possible to implement it without needing to update the API.

Having said that, I think that we probably want to list "well-known" QoS resource types somewhere, e.g. in the CRI API.

I will re-phrase this

> - Enumerating possible (QoS-class) resource types or their detailed behavior

Reviewer 6: Got it - enumerating != discovering. :)

### Phase 1

The goal is to enable a functional base for users to leverage QoS-class
resources and start experimenting with them in Kubernetes:

- extend the CRI protocol to allow QoS-class resource assignment and updates to
  be communicated from kubelet to the runtime
- extend the CRI protocol to allow runtime to communicate available QoS-class
  resources (the types of resources and the classes within) to kubelet
- introduce a feature gate for enabling QoS-class resource support in kubelet
- extend PodSpec to support assignment of QoS-clsss resources
- extend NodeStatus to show availability/capacity of QoS-clsss resources on a
  node

### Future work

This section sheds light on the end goal of this work in order to better
evaluate this KEP in a broader context. What a fully working solution would
consists of and what the (next) steps to accomplish that would be. These topics
are currently listed as "future work" in [Goals](#goals).

In practice, the future work mostly consists of changes to the Kubernetes API
and control plane components.

#### Update sandbox-level QoS-class resources

This future step would be a second extension to the CRI API.

> Currently there is no endpoint in the CRI API to update the configuration of

Reviewer 8: It is on my [radar](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3004#issuecomment-1384431707). It seems to be generic enough to fit well and be adapted for our network traffic QoS for pod traffic use case. I'm yet to catch up on the latest discussion, but my last chat with Markus was about finding a good way for CRI to discover QoS resources  classes and advertise to kubelet.

One suggestion is that if CRI can provide a register API, the node agent of the underlying CNI driver can invoke it after discovering what is possible on the node. In our case, hypothetical example would be "Node can support 10 pods at Premium (highest network priority), 30 at Expedited (below premium), and 60 pods at BestEffort class.". Likewise, RDT  may register its own class offerings and associated capacity values.

> Currently there is no endpoint in the CRI API to update the configuration of

Author: Yeah, we need to think what would be possible ways for CNI plugins to register QoS resources on the runtime. Even if they are "implementation details" wrt. to the scope of this KEP it's a very interesting use case

     Hard ResourceList
     // A collection of filters that must match each object tracked by a quota.
     // If not specified, the quota matches all objects.
     Scopes []ResourceQuotaScope 
     // scopeSelector is also a collection of filters like scopes that must match each
     // object tracked by a quota but expressed using ScopeSelectorOperator in combination
     // with possible values.
     ScopeSelector *ScopeSelector
+    // QoSResources contains the desired set of allowed class resources.
+    // +featureGate=QoSResources
+    // +optional
+    QoSResources QoSResourceQuota
 }

+// QoSResourceQuota contains the allowed class resources.
+type QoSResourceQuota struct {
+       // Pod contains the allowed class resources for pods.
+       // +optional
+       Pod []AllowedQoSResource
+       // Container contains the allowed class resources for pods.
+       // +optional
+       Container []AllowedQoSResource
+}

+// AllowedQoSResource specifies access to one QoS-class resources type.
+type AllowedQoSResource struct {
+       // Name of the resource.
+       Name QoSResourceName
+       // Allowed classes.
+       Classes []string

> +       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.

Author: > Do you think this is a count of pods or some scalar based on another resource (e.g. you can only put X many cores into cache class "gold") ?

I thought about counting how many pods (or containers) are using a specific class.

> I am concerned that quota will be the really hard part of this proposal to implement - it's not obvious that a simple count of pods/containers is always meaningful.

I agree that if we want to list other resources under the QoS resource quota it get's a lot hairier. I think it would then probably become something like quota-inside-quota like:

```yaml
spec:
  qosResources:
    container:
      - name: rdt
        classes:
          - name: gold
            hard:
              pods: 2
              containers: 4
              cpu: 4
```

> +       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.

Reviewer 6: blech.  I am not sure what the right answer is, but let's please save some of our "cleverness budget" for this.

> +       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.

Author: Sure, it's under future work anyway so not targeting the first implementation phase

> +       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.

Reviewer 6: I don't love that this is punted with no real idea how we might solve it

> +       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.

Reviewer 3: @thockin adding "Capacity" was one of the early feedbacks that we received from @derekwaynecarr. Initially all resources were "infinity", so it can be attached. Derek's concern was "if all are top-priority qos assigned containers, so nobody is top priority", which in some scenarios makes sense. That's why some simple entity counter based (pod/container) capacity was added.

> +       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.

Author: ping @thockin

  - pod eviction as a possible [future improvement](#kubelet-initiated-pod-eviction)
- scheduler
  - simple node filtering based on the availability of QoS-class resources in
    the first implementation phase (with possible
    [future improvements](#scheduler-improvements))
  - pod priority based eviction is in effect
- quota, limits and defaults are [future work](#future-work) items

### CRI API

The following additions to the CRI protocol are suggested.

#### ContainerConfig

The `ContainerConfig` message will be supplemented with new `class_resources`
field, providing per-container setting for QoS-class resources. This will be
used in `CreateContainerRequest` to communicate the container-level QoS-class
resource assignments to the runtime.

```diff
 message ContainerConfig {

 ...
     // Configuration specific to Linux containers.
     LinuxContainerConfig linux = 15;
     // Configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
+
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    ContainerQoSResources qos_resources = 17;
 }

+// ContainerQoSResources specifies the configuration of QoS resources of a
+// container.

> +message ContainerQoSResources {

Reviewer 11: I can't imagine containe rand pod QoSResources would be all that different, should they be made the same struct?

Reviewer 3: You mean re-use same message type in two places (pod cri calls and container cri calls) ?

Author: Good question, I played safe here (and this separation also reflects the current proposal of K8s API) 😇 You might know better than me, how likely it is that this would bit us in the future. Any thoughts @mrunalp @mikebrow or others?

Reviewer 11: since the types are opaque to kube, I don't see there being any issue in having them be the same. The K/V pairs can be interpreted appropriately by runtime, and presumably contain all the required metadata that would differentiate the two

Author: That is true. The only reason for having a separate struct was to keep the door open to differentiate the two in the future in terms of some extra fields (that the other doesn't need/support). I can surely change this to a single type if others agree

Author: marked as UNRESOLVED in the latest update

Author: -> marking this particular comment thread as resolved

+    // QoS resources the container will be assigned to.
+    // Key-value pairs where key is name of the QoS resource and value is the
+    // name of the class.
+    map<string, string> classes = 1;
+}
```

#### UpdateContainerResourcesRequest

Similar to `CreateContainerRequest`, the `UpdateContainerResourcesRequest`
message will extended to allow updating of QoS-class resource configuration of
a running container.  Depending on runtime-level support of a particular
resource (and possibly the type of resource) UpdateContainerResourcesRequest
might fail. Resource discovery (see [Runtime status](#runtime-status)) has
the capability to distinguish immutable resource types.

Note that neither of the existing QoS-class resource types (RDT or blockio)
support updates because of runtime limitations, yet.

> 

Reviewer 11: a note here and in the CRI message should be that UpdateContainerResources requests need to be atomic and fail if an aspect isn't applied. Thus, the container runtime should screen for the possibility of updating the resources before it calls the oci runtime to update the other resources

Author: Correct,. The wording here was somewhat confusing. I now updated the text, making your point clear.

Author: I also updated the comment in the CRI message

```diff
 message UpdateContainerResourcesRequest {

 ...
     // resources to update or other options to use when updating the container.
     map<string, string> annotations = 4;
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    ContainerQoSResources qos_resources = 5;
}
```

#### PodSandboxConfig

The `PodSandboxConfig` will be supplemented with a new `class_resources` field
that specifies the assignment of pod-level QoS-class resources. The intended
use for this would be to be able to communicate pod-level QoS-class resource
assignments at sandbox creation time (`RunPodSandboxRequest`).

```diff
 message PodSandboxConfig {
@@ -45,5 +45,14 @@ message PodSandboxConfig {
     LinuxPodSandboxConfig linux = 8;
     // Optional configurations specific to Windows hosts.
     WindowsPodSandboxConfig windows = 9;
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.

> +    PodQoSResources qos_resources = 10;

Reviewer 12: Could make this repeated and have a strong type with resource name and class value instead.

Author: Like this?

```diff
...
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    repeated PodQoSResource qos_resources = 10;
 }

+message PodQOSResource {
+    string name = 1;                                           
+    string class = 2;                                           
+} 

```

and dittor for container qos resources

Author: @mrunalp this has been changed, for Pod sandbox:

```diff
 message PodSandboxConfig {
...
     WindowsPodSandboxConfig windows = 9;
+    repeated PodQOSResource qos_resources = 10;
 }

+message PodQOSResource {
+    string name = 1;
+    string class = 2;
+}
```

and similarly for the container

```diff
 message ContainerConfig {
 ...
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
+    repeated ContainerQOSResource qos_resources = 17;
 }

+message ContainerQOSResource {
+    string name = 1;
+    string class = 2;
+}

Reviewer 12: okay :+1:

e.g. after re-configuration of the runtime.

Names of the QoS-class resources must be unique, also across pod-level and
container-level resources. I.e. the same name must not be advertised as both a
pod-level and container-level resource.

```diff
 message RuntimeStatus {
     // List of current observed runtime conditions.
     repeated RuntimeCondition conditions = 1;
+    // Information about the discovered resources
+    ResourcesInfo resources = 2;
+}

+// ResourcesInfo contains information about the resources discovered by the
+// runtime.
+message ResourcesInfo {
+    // Pod-level QoS resources available.
+    repeated QoSResourceInfo pod_qos_resources = 1;
+    // Container-level QoS resources available.
+    repeated QoSResourceInfo container_qos_resources = 2;
+}

+// QoSResourceInfo contains information about one type of QoS resource.
+message QoSResourceInfo {
+    // Name of the QoS resources. Name must be unique, also across pod and
+    // container level QoS resources.
+    string Name = 1;
+    // Mutable is set to true if this resource supports in-place updates i.e.
+    // the class of a running container or sandbox can be changed.

> +    bool Mutable = 2;

Reviewer 11: I find myself wondering: is this making the resource less opaque to kube? from kube's perspective aren't they all key values? 

going further: in a VPA scenerio, the autoscaler would need to know more intimately about these resources anyway (to know which to scale between, etc). What value would adding this give if we already need  to teach the autoscaler about the specifics of the resources themselves

Author: Yes, they are key-values. However, this information makes it possible to catch early (kube apiserver and kubelet) if a user is trying to update a QoS resource that doesn't support it (rather than failing late with an error at the runtime). Makes sense? Maybe the name "Mutable" should be something more descriptive.

I agree with the VPA scenario. It isn't generally applicable with QoS resources.

Reviewer 11: ah okay I misinterpreted the reasoning for it

Author: My bad English 🙄 I'm open to suggestions how to update the comment to make it more evident (and prevent others falling in the same misinterpretation), I think I've tried to improve this once or twice but failed...

application specific QoS implementations.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

```diff
+const (
+       // QoSResourceRdt is the name of the QoS-class resource named IntelRDT
+       // in the OCI runtime spec and interfaced through the resctrlfs
+       // pseudp-filesystem in Linux. This is a container-level reosurce.
+       QoSResourceIntelRdt = "rdt"
+       // QoSResourceBlockio is the name of the blockio QoS-class resource.
+       // This is a container-level resource.
+       QoSResourceBlockio = "blockio"
+)
```

In later implementation phases (GA) admission control (validation) is added to
reject requests for unknown QoS-class resources in the "official" namespace.
Also, kubelet will reject the registration of unknown QoS-class resources in
the "official" namespace. Custom/vendor-specific QoS-class resources will still
be allowed outside the "official" namespace.

### Kubelet

Kubelet gets QoS-class resource assignment from the [PodSpec](#podspec) and
translates these into corresponding `QoSResources` data in the CRI API. This is
ContainerConfig message at container creation time (CreateContainerRequest) and
PodSandboxConfig at sandbox creation time (RunPodSandboxRequest). In practice,

> there is no translation, just copying key-value pairse.

Author: Thx, fixed

specify Kubernetes-internal names that the container runtime would know to
ignore (or not try to manage itself).

One possible usage-scenario would be pod-level cgroup controls, e.g. cgroup v2
memory knobs in linux (see
[KEP-2570: Support Memory QoS with cgroups v2][kep-2570].

##### Container-level memory QoS

Container runtimes could implement an admin-configurable support for memory
QoS, as an alternative to
[KEP-2570: Support Memory QoS with cgroups v2][kep-2570].

It would be easy to enable also for example `memory.swap.*` control knobs
available in Linux cgroups v2 to control swap-usage on a per-container basis.

##### Runtime classes

The QoS-class resources mechanism could be "abused" to replace (or
re-implement) the current runtime classes.

One benefit of using a QoS-class resource to represent runtime classes would be
the "automatic" visibility to what runtime classes are available on each node.
E.g. adding a new runtime class on a node by re-configuration of the runtime
would be immediately reflected in the node status without any additional admin
tasks (like node labeling or manual creation of RuntimeClass objects).

###### Splitting Pod QoS Class

> Currently the Pod QoS class is an implicit property of a Pod, tied to how the
> resource requests and limits of its containers are specified. QoS-class
> resources would make it possible for users to explicitly specify the Pod QoS
> class in the PodSpec, making it possible e.g. to create a guaranteed pod with a
> container whose memory limit is higher than the requests.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently the Pod QoS class is an implicit property of a Pod, tied to how the
resource requests and limits of its containers are specified. QoS-class
resources could make it possible for users to explicitly specify the Pod QoS
class in the Pod's `.spec`, making it possible e.g. to define a pod with a
container whose memory limit is higher than the requests, but that is treated
by the node as `Guaranteed`.
```

Author: Thx, changed as suggested

> Taking this idea further, QoS-class resources would also make it possible to
> split several properties implicit in the Pod QoS class (like eviction behavior
> or OOM scoring) into separate properties. For example, in the case of OOM
> scoring make it possible for the user to specify a burstable pod with low OOM
> priority (low chance of being killed).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Taking this idea further, QoS-class resources could also make it possible to
split several properties implicit in the Pod QoS class (for example: eviction behavior
or OOM scoring) into separate properties. For example, in the case of OOM
scoring make it possible for the user to specify a burstable pod with low OOM
priority (low chance of being killed).
```

Author: Changed as suggested

The proposal only describes the details of implementation Phase 1 and some
parts like permission control are not covered. The
risk in this piecemeal approach is finding devil in the details, resulting in
inconsistent and/or crippled and/or cumbersome end result. However, the missing
parts are already outlined in [future work](#future-work) and there is aa lot
of experience in extending the API and understanding which sort of solutions
are functional and practical, mitigating the problem.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

The identified risks are mainly related to usability or unfriendly users
hogging all available high-priority QoS.

- User assigning container to “unauthorized” class, causing interference and
  access to unwanted set/amount of resources. This will be addressed in future
  KEP introducing permission controls.

> - Cross-registering pod and container-level QoS-class resources: it would be

Reviewer 4: _This is an informational comment and doesn't block merging the KEP._

Mitigation for this could be an API type, similar to GatewayClass or IngressClass, to define what
QoS assignments are possible and whether these are container-level, Pod-level, or support both.

Author: Maybe. But I think this creates another caveat: misconfiguration of this API object. Mis-configure the API object as pod-level resource when it should've been container-level (or vice versa) which would then prevent registration of the resource. And the risk for this is bigger (misconfiguration) than cross-registering which would be sort of mis-implementation on the runtime side

Reviewer 4: Once this merges, I can open a PR specifically about how I'd deal with this.

  possible to register a resource name as a pod-level resource on one node and
  as a container-level resource on one node. This would obviously be confusing
  for the user but also cause surprises in scheduling in some cases as
  container-level QoS-class resources may be specified in pod-level request
  field to denote pod-wide defaults for all containers within. This will be

>   mitigated in the future with "official" reqource names (we know which names

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  mitigated in the future with "official" resource names (we know which names
```

Author: Thx, fixed

resource (and possibly the type of resource) in-place updates of running
containers might not be possible. Resource discovery (see
[Runtime status](#runtime-status)) has the capability to distinguish whether a
particular QoS-class resource supports in-place updates (the Mutable field in
QOSResourceInfo message). UpdateContainerResources must be atomic so the
runtime must fail early (before e.g. calling the OCI runtime to make any
changes to other resources) if an attempt to update an "immutable" QoS-class
resource is requested.

Note that neither of the existing QoS-class resource types (RDT or blockio)
support updates because of runtime limitations, yet.

```diff
 message UpdateContainerResourcesRequest {

 ...
     // resources to update or other options to use when updating the container.
     map<string, string> annotations = 4;
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    // Note that UpdateContainerResourcesRequest must be atomic so that the
+    // runtime ensure that the requested update to QoS resources can be applied
+    // before e.g. updating other resources.
+    ContainerQOSResources qos_resources = 5;
}
```

#### PodSandboxConfig

> The `PodSandboxConfig` will be supplemented with a new `class_resources` field

Reviewer 4: `class_resources` or `qos_resources`?

+    PodQOSResources qos_resources = 10;
 }

+// PodQOSResources specifies the configuration of QoS resources of a pod.
+message PodQOSResources {
+    // QoS resources the pod will be assigned to.
+    // Key-value pairs where key is name of the QoS resource and value is the
+    // name of the class.
+    map<string, string> classes = 1;
+}
```

#### PodSandboxStatus

The `PodSandboxStatus` message will be extended to report back assignment of
pod-level QoS-class resources. The runtime must report back assignment of all
supported QoS-class resources, also defaults for resources that the client
didn't request anythin (see [implicit defaults](#implicit-defaults))

```diff
@@ -545,6 +545,8 @@ message PodSandboxStatus {
     // runtime configuration used for this PodSandbox.
     string runtime_handler = 9;
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    PodQOSResources qos_resources = 10;
 }

```

#### ContainerStatus

The `ContainerResources` message (part of `ContainerStatus`) will be extended
to report back QoS-class resource assignments of a container, similar to other
resources. The runtime must report back assignment of all supported QoS-class

> resources, also defaults for resources that the client didn't request anythin

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
resources, also defaults for resources that the client didn't request explicitly
```

Author: Thx, fixed!

 }

...

+// QOSResourceStatus describes QoS resources available on the node.
+type QOSResourceStatus struct {
+       // PodQOSResources contains the QoS resources that are available for pods
+       // to be assigned to.
+       PodQOSResources []QOSResourceInfo
+       // ContainerQOSResources contains the QoS resources that are available for
+       // containers to be assigned to.
+       ContainerQOSResources []QOSResourceInfo
+}

+// QOSResourceInfo contains information about one QoS resource type.
+type QOSResourceInfo struct {
+       // Name of the resource.
+       Name QOSResourceName
+       // Mutable is set to true if the resource supports in-place updates.
+       Mutable bool
+       // Classes available for assignment.
+       Classes []QOSResourceClassInfo
+}

+// QOSResourceClassInfo contains information about single class of one QoS
+// resource.
+type QOSResourceClassInfo struct {
+       // Name of the class.
+       Name string
+       // Capacity is the number of maximum allowed simultaneous assignments into this class
+       // Zero means "infinite" capacity i.e. the usage is not restricted
+       // +optional
+       Capacity int64
+}
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Would be nice to see an example Node status serialized out as YAML, including the new fields.

This change makes the information about Pod QoS explicit and allows elimination
of unreliable code paths in runtimes, for example.

Pod QoS class will not advertised as one of the available QoS-class resources
in NodeStatus. Also, users are not allowed to request it in the PodSpec which
will be enforced by admission checks in the api-server and kubelet.

```diff
+ // Kubernetes-managed QoS resources. These are only informational to the runtime
+ // and no CRI requests should fail because of these.
+const (
+       // QOSResourcePodQOS is the Kubernetes Pod Quality of Service Class.
+       // Possible values are "Guaranteed", "Burstable" and "BestEffort".
+       QOSResourcePodQOS = "pod-qos"
+)
```
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

### Kubelet

Kubelet gets QoS-class resource assignment from the [PodSpec](#podspec) and
translates these into corresponding `QOSResources` data in the CRI API. This is
ContainerConfig message at container creation time (CreateContainerRequest) and
PodSandboxConfig at sandbox creation time (RunPodSandboxRequest). In practice,
there is no translation, just copying key-value pairs.

Kubelet will receive the information about available QoS-class resources (the

> types of reqources and their classes) from the runtime over the CRI API (new

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
types of resources and their classes) from the runtime over the CRI API (new
```

Author: my fat fingers... fixed

to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/kuberuntime`: `2022-06-13` - `66.8%`
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go`: `2022-06-13` - `82.1%`
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler`

##### Integration tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

Alpha: Existing integration tests for kubelet and kube-scheduler will be
extended to cover QoS-class resources.

Beta: Existing integration tests for affected components (e.g. scheduler, node
status, quota) are extended to cover QoS-class resources.

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

> 

Reviewer 4: Is it helpful to have a mock CRI implementation that pretends to run a container with various QoS assignments, but doesn't really do so?

Author: Yes, if such a mock/stub CRI server implementation exists

Author: @sftim is there smth that's open regarding this?

Reviewer 4: I think it helps to copy that detail into the KEP text (ie, that a mock CRI implementation will be helpful).
This is OK to resolve whether we do or don't add that detail.

Author: K, I added a note in the KEP. It would be helpful if such a thing existed, I don't think there are many integration tests for kubelet.

> NOTE: having a mock implementation of CRI server would be helpful in writing
> integration tests for kubelet.

Will mark this as resolved...

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- In addition to the initial changes in CRI API, implement the following
  - Extend CRI API to support updating sandbox-level QoS-class resources

>   - Parmission control (resource quota)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - Permission control (ResourceQuota etc)
```

Author: Thx, changed as suggested

- Well-defined behavior with [In-place pod vertical scaling](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources)
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP
- User documentation is available

> 

Reviewer 4: Is it feasible to have a QoS assignment that you can only make for Pods with a particular RuntimeClass?

I suggest we consider it this possibility and account for it before graduating the feature to beta.

Author: Yes, I think that would be a feasible scenario. Added that to beta graduation criteria

Author: ...i.e. fixed

e.g. cache, memory bandwidth and disk I/O. While there are technologies for
controlling how these resources are shared between applications, there is
currently no meaningful way to support these technologies in Kubernetes. This
proposal suggests to address the issue above in a generalized way by extending
the Kubernetes resource model with a new type of resources, i.e. QoS-class
resources.

This KEP identifies two technologies that can immediately be enabled with
QoS-class resources. However, these are just two examples  and the proposed
changes are generic (and not tied to these two QoS-class resource types in any
way), making it easier to implement new QoS-class resource types.

[Intel RDT][intel-rdt] implements a class-based mechanism for controlling the
cache and memory bandwidth QoS of applications. All processes in the same
hardware class share a portion of cache lines and memory bandwidth. RDT
provides a way for mitigating noisy neighbors and fulfilling SLAs. In Linux
control happens via resctrl -- a pseudo-filesystem provided by the kernel which
makes it virtually agnostic of the hardware architecture. The OCI runtime-spec

> has supported Intel RDT for a while already. Other hardware vendors have

Reviewer 4: > The OCI runtime-spec has supported Intel RDT for a while already.

Is this true?

Author: Yes: https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/config-linux.md#intelrdt

Reviewer 4: Maybe link to https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/v1.0.2/config-linux.md#IntelRdt

Author: Link added

Author: i.e. fixed

However, this approach is quite involved, has shortcomings and caveats and thus
it is probably suitable only for targeted usage scenarios, not as a general
solution. Downsides include:

- requires implementation of "side channel" control mechanisms, e.g. admission
  webhook and some solution for capacity management (extended resources)
- deployment of admission webhooks is cumbersome
- management of capacity is limited and cumbersome
  - management of extended resources needs a separate mechanism
  - ugly to handle a scenario where *class-A* on *node-1* would be unlimited
    but on *node-2* it would have some capacity limit (e.g. use a very high
    integer capacity of the extended resource on *node-2*)
  - dynamic changes are harder
- not well-suited for managing pod-level QoS-class resources as pod-level
  resource requests (for the extended resource) are not supported in Kubernetes
- possible confusion for users regarding the double accounting (QoS-class
  resources and extended resources)

### RDT-only

The scope of the KEP could be narrowed down by concentrating on RDT only,
dropping support for blockio. This would center the focus on RDT only which is

> well understood and specified in the OCI runtime specification.

Reviewer 4: Ah yep. https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/v1.0.2/config-linux.md#IntelRdt

> well understood and specified in the OCI runtime specification.

Author: resolved(?)

> well understood and specified in the OCI runtime specification.

Reviewer 4: Sure. I can't mark this resolved.

  assignment of running pods (will be subject to a separate KEP)

## Implementation phases

This proposal splits the full implementation of QoS-class resources into
multiple phases, building functionality gradually. The goal is to
make the discussions more focused and easier. We may also learn on the way,
insights from earlier phases affecting design choices made in the later phases,
hopefully resulting in a better overall end result. However, we also outline
all the future steps to not lose the overall big picture.

The figure below illustrates the design of implementation phase 1. The first
implementation phase covers the communication between kubelet and the container
runtime (i.e. CRI API) and Kubernetes API for NodeStatus and PodSpec and their
respecive implementations (kubelet and kube-scheduler). Access control (e.g.
resource quota) is left to future work. This KEP (the [Proposal](#proposal) and
[Design Details](#design-details)) in its current form implements this first
phase.

![design](./design.svg)

QoS-class resources are designed to be opaque to the CRI client in the sense
that the container runtime takes care of configuration and control of the

> resources and the classes within.

Reviewer 7: and what have if the runtime does not implement it?

how an user can know if setting this parameters are going to work?

Author: In short, then the runtime does not advertise to kubelet (and it's not available on the node), i.e. it does not exist on the node from the K8s pov. Available QoS resource types (and their classes) can be seen from node status. Comparable to node resources in that respect, I'd say.

Author: Yes

Reviewer 7: Thanks for the clarification

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Add support to Kubernetes for declaring _quality-of-service_ resources, and
assigning these to Pods. A quality-of-service (QoS-class) resource is similar
to other Kubernetes resource types (i.e. native resources such as `cpu` and
`memory` or extended resources) because you can assign that resource to a
particular container. However, QoS-class resources are also different from

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Author: Yeah, naming and terminology is hard, I've been struggling with it and I'm not satisfied with it myself. The name QoS-class resources is not good in the sense that this would be a generic mechanism that could be used for other scenarios than pure "QoS", too, as pondered in the "Possible future scenarios" section under "User stories".

I'll sleep over this and try to come up with and suggest something better, more generic. If not for the name at least for better description for this section. Even the word "resource" might be a bit misleading here, maybe it should be _Resource-QoS_, or _QoS-assignments_, or _Class-assignments_ or...

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Author: > How about "However, QoS-class resources are also different from those other resource because they control access to a shared resource instead of granting exclusive access to a certain amount of capacity." ?

Even this is not necessarily true. It's not necessarily about sharing any resource, but e.g. applying some throttling (or other) parameters. On the plain API level it's sort of tagging the pods (and/or containers), i.e. applying a tag from a set of possible tag-values

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Reviewer 13: Prioritized Resource makes sense to me. This sounds a lot like priority and fairness in the apiserver but for individual resources.

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Author: Thanks @logicalhan for the review. I'm really struggling with the naming bc the K8s API is sort of generic mechanism for "tagging" or assigning pods/containers to classes of different types. Even the term "resource" seems to be misleading into thinking quantitative allocation of resources (like devices or cpus). 

@logicalhan do you have suggestions for the field names in the api etc?

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Reviewer 6: Do we have concrete examples of things where we want to apply QoS, but which REALLY don't feel like "resources"?

While "QoS" is somewhat jargon-y, it's pretty well understood in my experience.  Alternately, if this is just about names, we could look for similar words?

"banded resources" ? It sort of implies linearness of bands

"tiered resources" ?  Also implies linearity, which I don't think is necessarily true

"categorized" ?

"qualitative" ?

provide an bridge-gap user interface through special pod annotations. The goal
is to get these types of resources first class citizens and properly supported
in Kubernetes, providing visibility, a well-defined user interface, and
permission controls.

We can identify two types, container-level and pod-level QoS-class resources.
Container-level resources enable QoS on per-container granularity, for example
container-level cgroups in Linux or cache and memory bandwidth control
technologies. Examples for pod-level QoS include e.g. pod-level cgroups or
network QoS that cannot support per-container granularity.

### Goals

- Make it possible to request QoS-class resources
  - Support RDT class assignment of containers. This is already supported by
    the containerd and CRI-O runtime and part of the OCI runtime-spec
  - Support blockio class assignment of containers.
  - Support Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resources
- Make the API to support updating QoS-class resource assignment of running containers
- Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other QoS-class
  resource types in the future.

> - Make QoS-class resources opqaue (as possible) to the CRI client

Author: Thanks, fixed

- scheduler
  - simple node filtering based on the availability of QoS-class resources in
    the first implementation phase (with possible
    [future improvements](#scheduler-improvements))
  - pod priority based eviction is in effect
- quota, limits and defaults are [future work](#future-work) items

### CRI API

The following additions to the CRI protocol are suggested.

#### Implicit defaults

Any defaults imposed by the runtime, i.e. for resources that the user didn't
request anything, must be reflected in the PodSandboxStatus and ContainerStatus
messages. This information (about implicit defaults) can change during the
lifetime of the Pod e.g. because of re-configuration of the runtime:

- new QoS resource types might be added in which case a Pod/Container is
  assigned to the default class of this new resource and this information must
  be reflected in PodSandboxStatus/ContainerStatus
- the default class of an existing QoS resource type might change and the
  Pod/Container migrated to this class and this information must be reflected
  in PodSandboxStatus/ContainerStatus

An empty value (empty string) denotes "system default" i.e. the runtime did not

> enforce any QoS for this specific type of QoS-class resource. An example can be

Author: Thx, fixed as suggested

> for example Linux cgroup controls where "system default" would mean that the

Author: Thx, fixed as suggested

runtime did not enforce any changes so they will be set to the default values

> determined by the system configuration.

Author: @mikebrow what do you mean by publishing system defaults? Somehow expose the configuration (e.g. values of cgroup knobs, which I don't think fits in this KEP) or something else?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

TBD in future implementation phases.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

<!--
Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.
-->

Implementation Phase 1: No.

Future implementation phases: TBD but should be no. Disabling the feature
should preserve the data of new fields (e.g. in pod spec) even if they are
disabled.

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

> By examining the new fields in pod spec.

Reviewer: A metric would be better.

Reviewer 13: +1 but this is alpha so is deferrable.

implementation phase covers the communication between kubelet and the container
runtime (i.e. CRI API) and Kubernetes API for NodeStatus and PodSpec and their
respecive implementations (kubelet and kube-scheduler). Access control (e.g.
resource quota) is left to future work. This KEP (the [Proposal](#proposal) and
[Design Details](#design-details)) in its current form implements this first
phase.

![design](./design.svg)

QoS-class resources are designed to be opaque to the CRI client in the sense
that the container runtime takes care of configuration and control of the
resources and the classes within.

### Phase 1

The goal is to enable a functional base for users to leverage QoS-class
resources and start experimenting with them in Kubernetes:

- extend the CRI protocol to allow QoS-class resource assignment and updates to
  be communicated from kubelet to the runtime
- extend the CRI protocol to allow runtime to communicate available QoS-class
  resources (the types of resources and the classes within) to kubelet
- introduce a feature gate for enabling QoS-class resource support in kubelet
- extend PodSpec to support assignment of QoS-clsss resources

> - extend NodeStatus to show availability/capacity of QoS-clsss resources on a

Reviewer 11: I think there's desire for dynamic qos classes

> - extend NodeStatus to show availability/capacity of QoS-clsss resources on a

Author: Yes, this is intended to be dynamic. Available QoS resources might change because of re-configuration or restart of the container runtime

+// possible limits for its usage.
+type AllowedQOSResourceClass struct {
+       // Name of the class.
+       Name string
+       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.
+       // +optional
+       Capacity int64
+}

 // ResourceQuotaStatus defines the enforced hard limits and observed use.
 type ResourceQuotaStatus struct {
        ...
        // Used is the current observed total usage of the resource in the namespace
        // +optional
        Used ResourceList
+       // QOSResources contains the enforced set of available QoS resources.
+       // +optional
+       QOSResources QOSResourceQuota
+       // QOSResourcesUsage contains the observed usage of QoS resources in the namespace.
+       // +optional
+       QOSResourcesUsage QOSResourceQuota
 }
```

#### Scheduler improvements

The first implementation phase only adds basic filtering of nodes based on
QoS-class resources and node scoring is not altered. However, the relevant
scheduler plugins (e.g. NodeResourcesFit and NodeResourcesBalancedAllocation)
could be extended to do scoring based on the capacity, availability and usage
of QoS-class resources on the nodes.

#### Kubelet-initiated pod eviction

> QoS-class resources available on a node are dynamic in the sense that they may

Reviewer 11: if the ultimate intention of qos classes are to be dynamic, i think it makes sense to impelement it the right way the first time.  I think cpu/memory being dynamic is a bit different, because these fields are still owned totally by the kubelet, not by the cri impl. Thus, discovering and handling changes will work differently for each

> QoS-class resources available on a node are dynamic in the sense that they may

Author: Yes, I agree with @haircommander. I don't see much reason for forcing them to be static. And since they are managed by the runtime you cannot really prevent them from being dynamic, in practice, imo

runtime did not enforce any changes so they will be set to the default values
determined by the system configuration.

#### ContainerConfig

The `ContainerConfig` message will be supplemented with new `qos_resources`
field, providing per-container setting for QoS-class resources. This will be
used in `CreateContainerRequest` to communicate the container-level QoS-class
resource assignments to the runtime.

```diff
 message ContainerConfig {

 ...
     // Configuration specific to Linux containers.
     LinuxContainerConfig linux = 15;
     // Configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
+
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    repeated ContainerQOSResource qos_resources = 17;
 }

+// ContainerQOSResource specifies the assignment of one QoS resource for a
+// container.
+message ContainerQOSResource {
+    // Name of the QoS resource.
+    string name = 1;
+    // Name of the class.
+    string class = 2;
+}
```

`<<[UNRESOLVED @haircommander @mrunalp]>>`

Instead of separate types (ContainerQOSResource ans PodQOSResource) use shared
type (say QOSResource) for assignment/status of both container and pod level

> resources.

Reviewer 11: I'm of the opinion we should compress them if we don't expect any additional metadata to be needed for either.

nit: and*

Reviewer 11: ah I see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3004/files#r1191541425 now. sounds like @thockin and I disagree on reusing

Author: @mrunalp ^

     LinuxContainerResources linux = 1;
     // Resource limits configuration specific to Windows container.
     WindowsContainerResources windows = 2;
+    // Assignment of QoS resources. The runtime must report back assignment
+    // of all available QoS resources on the node, also possible defaults for
+    // resources that the client didn't explicitly request.
+    repeated ContainerQOSResource qos_resources = 3;
```

#### RuntimeStatus

Extend the `RuntimeStatus` message with new `resources` field that is used to
communicate the available QoS-class resources from the runtime to the client.
This information is dynamic i.e. the available QoS-class resources (or their
properties like available classes or per-class capacity) may change over time,
e.g. after re-configuration of the runtime.

Names of the QoS-class resources must be unique, also across pod-level and
container-level resources. I.e. the same name must not be advertised as both a
pod-level and container-level resource.

```diff
 message RuntimeStatus {
     // List of current observed runtime conditions.
     repeated RuntimeCondition conditions = 1;
+    // Information about the discovered resources

> +    ResourcesInfo resources = 2;

Reviewer 3: We don't have concept right now in Kubernetes where resources will be "nested" under the RuntimeClass handlers. In overall, it would in my opinion screw up the accounting and resource discovery in multiple components. What we can potentially do later on, as separate KEP, is automatic discovery of the runtime classes/handlers, and "boolean" flags if some runtime handler supports particular resource or not. This way it would be possible to keep accounting global per node, but at the same time report pods as "pending" in scheduler if there is no node with desired combination of runtime handler + set of requested resources (native, extended, qos,....) are available. Simple but user friendly UX IMHO.

> +    ResourcesInfo resources = 2;

Author: @mikebrow I put runtime class specific QoS as a non-goal in the KEP. This deserves a separate KEP if we want to have this as I really think that it should then cover other resource management, not just QoS and it will roll like a snowball all over the APIs and the codebase.

hardware class share a portion of cache lines and memory bandwidth. RDT
provides a way for mitigating noisy neighbors and fulfilling SLAs. In Linux
control happens via resctrl -- a pseudo-filesystem provided by the kernel which
makes it virtually agnostic of the hardware architecture. The OCI runtime-spec
has supported Intel RDT for a while already (see the
[OCI runtime-spec][oci-runtime-rdt]). Other hardware vendors have comparable
technologies which use the same [resctrl interface][linux-resctrl].

The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying
hardware and system configuration (device naming/numbering, IO scheduler
configuration etc) which makes it very impractical to control from the Pod spec
level. In order to hide this complexity the concept of blockio classes has been
added to the container runtimes (CRI-O and containerd). A system administrator
is able to configure blockio controller parameters on per-class basis and the
classes are then made available for CRI clients. Following this model also
provides a possible framework for the future improvements, for instance
enabling class-based network or memory type prioritization of applications.

> Currently, there is no mechanism in Kubernetes to use these types of resources.

Reviewer 4: nit: when is “currently”? (this may change)

> CRI-O and containerd runtimes have support for RDT and blockio classes and they
> provide an bridge-gap user interface through special pod annotations. The goal

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CRI-O and containerd runtimes have support for RDT and blockio classes. There is also de facto
approach where some container runtimes also honor annotations (passed via CRI) on containers,
with an inferred expectation that people set the equivalent nonstandard and private annotations on
a Kubernetes Pod. 
The goal of this KEP
```

Reviewer 4: Sounds good to me.

-->

Implementation Phase 1: No.

Future implementation phases: QoS-class resources do extend existing API types
but presumably not introduce new types of objects. However, the design for
resource discovery and permission control is not ready which might change this.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - Which API(s):
  - Estimated increase:
-->

No, enabling or using the feature does not result in any new calls to the cloud
provider.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type(s):
  - Estimated increase in size: (e.g., new annotation of size 32B)
  - Estimated amount of new objects: (e.g., new Object X for every existing Pod)
-->

Implementation Phase 1: [pod annotations](#pod-annotations) are used as the
initial user interface so assign QoS-class resources to containers. Exact size
of each annotation varies (depending on the type of resource) but the
annotation key is expected to be few tens of bytes. The value part is the name

> of the class expected to be a few bytes long.

Reviewer 4: - Are these public annotation keys (starting with a DNS domain name then a slash then an identifier)?
- How would we ever phase these out?

Author: Uh-oh, the PRR questionnaire was badly outdated with mentions of the Pod annotation "UX" that has been dropped from the proposal (except for the "Alternatives" section. Thx for commenting this.

@sftim I now updated the whole PRRQ section, no annotations are mentioned there -> I consider this aspect of PRRQ fixed

Reviewer 4: OK, sure.

- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Pod annotations

Instead of updating CRI and Kubernetes API in lock-step, the API changes could
be split into two phases. Similar to e.g. how seccomp support was added, Pod
annotations could be used as an initial user interface before the Kubernetes
API changes are merged.

Specifically, annotations for specifying RDT and blockio class would be
supported. These are the two types of QoS-class resources that already have
basic support in the container runtimes.

- `rdt.resources.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default RDT
  class for all containers
- `rdt.resources.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for
  container-specific RDT class settings

>   blockio class for all containers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Author: fixed, changed as suggested

- `blockio.resources.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default
  blockio class for all containers
- `blockio.resources.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for
  container-specific blockio class settings

#### Kubelet

Kubelet would interpret the specific [pod annotations](#pod-annotations) and
translate them into corresponding `QOSResources` data in the CRI
ContainerConfig message at container creation time (CreateContainerRequest).
Pod-level QoS-class would not supported at this point (via pod annotations).

A feature gate QOSResources would enable kubelet to interpretthe specific pod
annotations. If the feature gate is disabled the annotations would simply be
ignored by kubelet.

#### API server

A validation check (core api validation) would added in the API server to
reject changes to the QoS-class resource specific
[pod annotations](#pod-annotations) after a Pod has been created. This would
ensure that the annotations always reflect the actual assignment of QoS-class
resources of a Pod. It also would serve as part of the UX to indicate the

> in-place updates of the resources via annotations is not supported.

Reviewer 4: :warning: It's unusual for us to reject metadata changes after an object is created. We usually limit that kind of restriction to apply to actual API fields.

Reviewer 4: I'll leave this to highlight the behavior to reviewers. This comment shouldn't by itself block a merge.

With QoS-class resources, Pods and their containers can request opaque
QoS-class identifiers (classes) of certain QoS mechanism (QoS-class resource
type). Kubelet relays this information to the container runtime, without
directing how the request is enforced in the underlying system. Being opaque to
Kubernetes means that QoS-class resources have to be supported by the container
runtime as it is responsible for the actual low-level management of them.

## Motivation

This enhancement proposal aims at improving the quality of service of
applications by making available a new type of resource control mechanism in
Kubernetes. Certain types of resources are inherently shared by applications,
e.g. cache, memory bandwidth and disk I/O. While there are technologies for
controlling how these resources are shared between applications, there is
currently no meaningful way to support these technologies in Kubernetes. This
proposal suggests to address the issue above in a generalized way by extending
the Kubernetes resource model with a new type of resources, i.e. QoS-class
resources.

This KEP identifies two technologies that can immediately be enabled with

> QoS-class resources. However, these are just two examples  and the proposed

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
QoS-class resources. However, these are just two examples and the proposed
```

Author: Thx, fixed

#### Access control

This future step adds support for controlling the access to available QoS-class
resources.

Access control could be achieved e.g. by extending ResourceQuotaSpec which
would implement restrictions based on the namespace.

```diff
 // ResourceQuotaSpec defines the desired hard limits to enforce for Quota.
 type ResourceQuotaSpec struct {
     // hard is the set of desired hard limits for each named resource.
     Hard ResourceList
     // A collection of filters that must match each object tracked by a quota.
     // If not specified, the quota matches all objects.
     Scopes []ResourceQuotaScope 
     // scopeSelector is also a collection of filters like scopes that must match each
     // object tracked by a quota but expressed using ScopeSelectorOperator in combination
     // with possible values.
     ScopeSelector *ScopeSelector
+   // QOSResources contains the desired set of allowed QoS resources.
+   // +optional
+   QOSResources QOSResourceQuota
 }

+// QOSResourceQuota contains the allowed QoS resources.
+type QOSResourceQuota struct {
+       // Pod contains the allowed QoS resources for pods.
+       // +optional
+       Pod []AllowedQOSResource

> +       // Container contains the allowed QoS resources for pods.

Reviewer 13: Do you mean `Container contains the allowed QoS resources for containers.`?

Author: Yes, for containers. Thx for pointing this out. Fixed

resources. An additional possible usage would be to set per-pod limits on the
usage of container-level QoS-class resources.

```diff
 // LimitRangeItem defines a min/max usage limit for any resource that matches on kind
 type LimitRangeItem struct {
@@ -5167,6 +5167,28 @@ type LimitRangeItem struct {
        // MaxLimitRequestRatio represents the max burst value for the named resource
        // +optional
        MaxLimitRequestRatio ResourceList
+       //  QOSResources specifies the limits for QoS resources.
+       QOSResources []LimitQOSResource
+}
+
+// LimitQOSResource specifies limits of one QoS resources type.
+type LimitQOSResource struct {
+       // Name of the resource.
+       Name QOSResourceName
+       // Default specifies the default class to be assigned.
+       // +optional
+       Default string
+       // Max usage of classes
+       // +optional
+       Max []QOSResourceClassLimit
+}
+
+// QOSResourceClassLimit specifies a limit for one class of a QoS resource.
+type QOSResourceClassLimit struct {
+       // Name of the class.
+       Name string
+       // Capacity is the limit for usage of the class.

> +       Capacity int64

Reviewer 13: nit: I prefer `Ceiling`

Author: Noted. I added this as UNRESOLVED in the KEP. Just a reminder that all the stuff under `Future work` is unresolved for the time being but made this detail explicit...

in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- In addition to the initial changes in CRI API, implement the following
  - Extend CRI API to support updating sandbox-level QoS-class resources
  - Permission control (ResourceQuota etc)
- Well-defined behavior with [In-place pod vertical scaling](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources)
- Integration with RuntimeClasses
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP
- User documentation is available

#### GA

- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback
- In addition to beta:

>   - enforce admission control on "official" QoS-class resource names

Reviewer 13: This should be a beta feature, what happens if a creation with an invalid resource name occurs and then we upgrade the apiserver (effectively promoting this feature to stable) with admission control enforcement on the name?

Author: Good point, and makes sense. Technically this isn't a big deal. I new moved this to Beta criteria, as suggested.

        - kube-scheduler
        - kube-controller-manager
- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

Yes it can.

Running workloads continue to work without any changes. Restarting or
re-deploying a workload causes it to fail as the requested QoS-class resources
are not available in Kubernetes anymore. The resources are still supported by

> the underlying runtime but disabling the feature in Kubernetes makes them

Reviewer 13: By "Kubernetes" do you mean kube-apiserver, kubelet or both?

Reviewer: I think the answers are:
- kubelet - it would ignore this
- kube-scheduler - ignore it
- api-server - reject except in the case of an update where they fields were already present and are unchanged, in which case it is preserved (see https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md#lifecycle).

Even with these unresoloved, I consider this non-blocking for PRR, but of course you must resolve this before code freeze.

Author: I updated this section with a more detailed description on the behavior of individual components (kubelet, apiserver, scheduler).

Author: ping @logicalhan ^

need to be restarted.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

Kubelet unit tests are extended to verify that no QoS-class resource
assignments are correctly passed down to the CRI API, also verifying that
assignments are not passed down if the feature gate is disabled.

Apiserver unit tests are extended to verify that the new fields in PodSpec are
preserved over updates of the Pod object, even when the feature gate is
disabled.

> 

Reviewer 13: Scheduler probably needs tests as well.

Author: Definitely, node fitting must be covered. Thanks for noting. Updated.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

> Implementation Phase 1: Already running workloads ahouls not be affected as the

Reviewer 13: `ahouls`?

Author: s/ahouls/should/ (shift-right-by-one of the left hand on the keyboard or smth 😇). Fixed, thx

QoS-class resources feature operates on new fields in the PodSpec. Bugs in
kubelet might cause containers fail to start, either by failing a pod admission
check that should pass or passing incorrect parameters to the container
runtime. Bugs in kube-scheduler might leave Pods in pending state (even though
they could be run in some node) or scheduling on an incorrect node, causing
kubelet todeny running the pod.

Future implementation phases: TBD.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

> Implementation Phase 1: Watch for non-ready pods with CreateContainerError

Reviewer 13: We should probably add a metric to scheduler for this.

Author: The CreateContainerError originates from the CRI runtime and has nothing to do with scheduling. There's already e.g. `kubelet_started_containers_errors_total` metric in the kubelet. That if we state that for kube-scheduler and kubelet the existing metrics can be used, WDYT @logicalhan?

Reviewer 13: Okay that sounds reasonable to me.

Author: OK, added sentence `For kube-scheduler and kubelet the existing metrics (e.g. kubelet_started_containers_errors_total) can be used.`

Instead of updating CRI and Kubernetes API in lock-step, the API changes could
be split into two phases. Similar to e.g. how seccomp support was added, Pod
annotations could be used as an initial user interface before the Kubernetes
API changes are merged.

Specifically, annotations for specifying RDT and blockio class would be
supported. These are the two types of QoS-class resources that already have
basic support in the container runtimes.

- `rdt.resources.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default RDT
  class for all containers
- `rdt.resources.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for
  container-specific RDT class settings
  blockio class for all containers
- `blockio.resources.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default
- `blockio.resources.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for
  container-specific blockio class settings

#### Kubelet

Kubelet would interpret the specific [pod annotations](#pod-annotations) and
translate them into corresponding `QOSResources` data in the CRI
ContainerConfig message at container creation time (CreateContainerRequest).
Pod-level QoS-class would not supported at this point (via pod annotations).

> A feature gate `TranslateQoSPodMetadata` would enable kubelet to interpretthe

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
A feature gate `TranslateQoSPodMetadata` would enable kubelet to interpret the
```

Author: Thx, fixed

specific pod annotations. If the feature gate is disabled the annotations would
simply be ignored by kubelet.

#### API server

A validation check (core api validation) would added in the API server to
reject changes to the QoS-class resource specific
[pod annotations](#pod-annotations) after a Pod has been created. This would
ensure that the annotations always reflect the actual assignment of QoS-class
resources of a Pod. It also would serve as part of the UX to indicate the
in-place updates of the resources via annotations is not supported.

### Class capacity with extended resources

Support for class capacity could be left out of the proposal to simplify the
concept. It would be possible to implement "class capacity" by leveraging
extended resources and mutating admission webhooks:

> 1. An extended resource with the desited capacity is created for each class

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
1. An extended resource with the desired capacity is created for each class
```

Author: Thx, fixed

  ```plaintext
  Allocatable:
  qos/container/resource-X/class-A:        2
  qos/container/resource-X/class-B:        4
  qos/container/resource-Y/class-foo:      1
  ```

  In this example *class-A* and *class-B* of QoS-class resource *resource-X*
  would be limited to 2 and 4 assignments, respectively (on this node).
  Similarly, class *class-foo* of QoS-class resource *resource-Y* would be
  limited to only one assignment.

2. A specific mutating admission webhook is deployed which syncs the specific
   extended resources. That is, if a specific QoS-class resource assignment is
   requested in the pod spec, a request for the corresponding extended resource
   is automatically added. And vice versa: if a specific extended resource is
   requested a QoS-class resource request is automatically put in place.

However, this approach is quite involved, has shortcomings and caveats and thus
it is probably suitable only for targeted usage scenarios, not as a general
solution. Downsides include:

- requires implementation of "side channel" control mechanisms, e.g. admission
  webhook and some solution for capacity management (extended resources)

> - deployment of admission webhooks is cumbersome

Reviewer 13: Validation admission policies mitigates this somewhat.

Author: But can you do mutating webhooks with that?

Reviewer 13: It's actually in the works.

Author: Noted. I added mention about this in the KEP

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Add support to Kubernetes for declaring _quality-of-service_ resources, and
assigning these to Pods. A quality-of-service (QoS-class) resource is similar
to other Kubernetes resource types (i.e. native resources such as `cpu` and
`memory` or extended resources) because you can assign that resource to a
particular container. However, QoS-class resources are also different from
those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,
rather than to declare a specific amount of capacity that is allocated.

Main characteristics of the new resource type (and the technologies they are
aimed at enabling) are:

- multiple containers can be assigned to the same class of a certain type of
  QoS-class resource

> - QoS-class resources are represented by an enumerable set of class identifiers

Author: No limit is currently specified

implementation phase covers the communication between kubelet and the container
runtime (i.e. CRI API) and Kubernetes API for NodeStatus and PodSpec and their
respecive implementations (kubelet and kube-scheduler). Access control (e.g.
resource quota) is left to future work. This KEP (the [Proposal](#proposal) and
[Design Details](#design-details)) in its current form implements this first
phase.

![design](./design.svg)

QoS-class resources are designed to be opaque to the CRI client in the sense
that the container runtime takes care of configuration and control of the
resources and the classes within.

### Phase 1

The goal is to enable a functional base for users to leverage QoS-class
resources and start experimenting with them in Kubernetes:

- extend the CRI protocol to allow QoS-class resource assignment and updates to
  be communicated from kubelet to the runtime
- extend the CRI protocol to allow runtime to communicate available QoS-class
  resources (the types of resources and the classes within) to kubelet
- introduce a feature gate for enabling QoS-class resource support in kubelet
- extend PodSpec to support assignment of QoS-clsss resources

> - extend NodeStatus to show availability/capacity of QoS-clsss resources on a

Author: @swatisehgal Scheduler being aware of the QoS resources is one of the key things in the proposal. It's described in the "Scheduler" section

> - extend NodeStatus to show availability/capacity of QoS-clsss resources on a

Author: Thx, fixed

+       // Allowed classes.
+       Classes []AllowedQOSResourceClass
+}

+// AllowedQOSResourceClass specifies one allowed class of a QoS resource and
+// possible limits for its usage.
+type AllowedQOSResourceClass struct {
+       // Name of the class.
+       Name string
+       // Capacity is the hard limit for usage of the class.
+       // +optional
+       Capacity int64
+}

 // ResourceQuotaStatus defines the enforced hard limits and observed use.
 type ResourceQuotaStatus struct {
        ...
        // Used is the current observed total usage of the resource in the namespace
        // +optional
        Used ResourceList
+       // QOSResources contains the enforced set of available QoS resources.
+       // +optional
+       QOSResources QOSResourceQuota
+       // QOSResourcesUsage contains the observed usage of QoS resources in the namespace.
+       // +optional
+       QOSResourcesUsage QOSResourceQuota
 }
```

#### Scheduler improvements

The first implementation phase only adds basic filtering of nodes based on
QoS-class resources and node scoring is not altered. However, the relevant
scheduler plugins (e.g. NodeResourcesFit and NodeResourcesBalancedAllocation)

> could be extended to do scoring based on the capacity, availability and usage

Author: > Are those individual class ids countable?

Well, yes they are. You can count e.g. how many containers on Node A are assigned to class X. Like any other resources.

Regarding the terms (I added these clarifications to the KEP also):
- "capacity" is the maximum number of users of certain class on a node
- "usage" is the current number of assignments to a certain class on a node
- "availability" is how much of the capacity is still available (i.e. capacity minus usage).

@swatisehgal  makes sense?

> of QoS-class resources on the nodes.

Author: >  I don't see a lot of details about scheduling in the rest of the proposal.

@swatisehgal I'm a bit unsure what sort of details you're after. The proposal is to implement filtering based on node status vs. pod requests. – as mentioned the scheduling would be very much similar to how native and extended resources are handled. Future improvements are discussed in the "future work" section.

> I think we should add someone from SIG scheduling to provide their input on this KEP.

Hmm, possibly
/sig scheduling

runtimes lack the capability to update either of the two types of QoS-class
resources we have identified (RDT and blockio). However, there is no technical
limitation in that and we are planning to implement update support for them
in the future.

We also extend the Kubernetes API to support the assignment of QoS-class
resources to applications via PodSpec, and to users and the kube-scheduler to
see availability of QoS-class resources on a per-node basis via NodeStatus.

Container runtime is expected to be aware of all resource types and the classes
within. The CRI protocol is extended to be able to communicate the available
QoS-class resources from the runtime to the client. This information includes:
- Available QoS-class resource types.
- Available classes within each resource type.
- Whether the resource type is immutable or if it supports in-place updates.
  In-place updates of resoures might not be possible because of runtime
  limitations or the underlying technology, for example.

QoS-class resources may be bounded in the way that the number of applications
that can be assigned to a specific class (of one QoS-class resource) on a node

> can be limited. This limit is configuratble on a per-class (and per-node)

Author: Thx, fixed

> basis. This can be used to e.g. limit access to a high-tier class.

Author: It's "configured" by the CRI runtime at when it registers the QoS resources with kubelet. Also, in later implementation phases ResourceQuota could be used to limit/restrict usage.

Enforcement is in scheduler and kubelet admission (and with ResourceQuota in kube-apiserver admission controller). Runtime implementation is out of the scope of the proposal but I'd expect it to do enforcement if it reports some max capacity for a class.

> basis. This can be used to e.g. limit access to a high-tier class.

Reviewer 14: Ack, Thanks.

Pod-level and container-level QoS-class resources are independent resource
types. However, specifying a container-level QoS-class resource something in

> the pod-level request in PodSpec will be regarded by Kubernetres as a default

Author: Fixed

This change would make the information about Pod QoS explicit and would allow
elimination of unreliable code paths in runtimes, for example.

Pod QoS class would not be advertised as one of the available QoS-class
resources in NodeStatus. Also, users would not be allowed to request it in the
PodSpec which would be enforced by admission checks in the api-server and
kubelet. In other words, this would be purely informational, aimed for the
container runtime.

```diff
+ // Kubernetes-managed QoS resources. These are only informational to the runtime
+ // and no CRI requests should fail because of these.
+const (
+       // QOSResourcePodQOS is the Kubernetes Pod Quality of Service Class.
+       // Possible values are "Guaranteed", "Burstable" and "BestEffort".
+       QOSResourcePodQOS = "pod-qos"
+)
```

##### Kubernetes-managed QoS-class resources

It would be possible to have QoS-class resources that would be managed by
Kubernetes/kubelet instead of the container runtime. If we specify and manage
official well-known QoS-class resource names in the API it would be possible to
specify Kubernetes-internal names that the container runtime would know to

> ignore (or not try to manage itself).

Author: Just a note that this section is speculation for possible future usages, not fully designed by any means, and not proposed to be implemented.

I suppose it would be kubelet who's responsible for keeping the node status. There are multiple options how to distinguish them but I think possibly the most obvious is to have a well-known prefix (like `k8s.io/`) to have for K8s-managed QoS-resources. Other options include e.g. a) Just list the K8s-managed QoS in the API (consts) but then there's a version skew problem (if smth is added to the API, older runtimes are not aware of this) b) Kubelet just filters out these from the CRI request (i.e. the runtime would be totally unaware of these) but there are probably cases where the runtime would like to know about these (as informational) c) Kubelet tells the CRI runtime what are the K8s-managed QoS-resources (like the UpdateRuntimeConfig rpc) but this feels complex

I added a mention about this in this section as well as the "Consts" section below.

> ignore (or not try to manage itself).

Author: @swatisehgal after a second thought I changed the proposed naming so that unprefixed names (like `podqos` would be reserved for Kubernetes-managed "native" QoS resources and `k8s.io/` prefix would be reserved for official/canonical runtime-managed QoS resources.

> ignore (or not try to manage itself).

Reviewer 14: This makes sense, Thanks for the clarification.

> ignore (or not try to manage itself).

Reviewer 4: > @swatisehgal after a second thought I changed the proposed naming so that unprefixed names (like `podqos` would be reserved for Kubernetes-managed "native" QoS resources and `k8s.io/` prefix would be reserved for official/canonical runtime-managed QoS resources.

That's the opposite of how we usually do it; for labels, `example-thing` and `foo.bar.23` are private use for a cluster operator to pick their own names, whereas `kubernetes.io/example` and `qos.kubernetes.io/example-2` are official.

> ignore (or not try to manage itself).

Reviewer 4: We could do that if using an unrecognized name with no prefix is an API error - is that the plan?

> ignore (or not try to manage itself).

Reviewer 3: @marquiz to confirm, but in my opinion: yes. un-preffixed we should have clean list constants that api server and kubelet would verify ownership. for reserved prefix we might want to agree for kubelet/runtime validation schema if they are ok to share k8s.io/kubernetes.io prefix. for anything else, some simple validation for naming schema like API server does for extended resources names.

re-implement) the current runtime classes.

One benefit of using a QoS-class resource to represent runtime classes would be
the "automatic" visibility to what runtime classes are available on each node.
E.g. adding a new runtime class on a node by re-configuration of the runtime
would be immediately reflected in the node status without any additional admin
tasks (like node labeling or manual creation of RuntimeClass objects).

##### Splitting Pod QoS Class

Currently the Pod QoS class is an implicit property of a Pod, tied to how the
resource requests and limits of its containers are specified. QoS-class
resources could make it possible for users to explicitly specify the Pod QoS
class in the Pod's `.spec`, making it possible e.g. to define a pod with a
container whose memory limit is higher than the requests, but that is treated
by the node as `Guaranteed`.

Taking this idea further, QoS-class resources could also make it possible to
split several properties implicit in the Pod QoS class (for example: eviction
behavior or OOM scoring) into separate properties. For example, in the case of
OOM scoring make it possible for the user to specify a burstable pod with low

> OOM priority (low chance of being killed).

Reviewer 14: Can you elaborate how this can be achieved? I am struggling to wrap my head around this.

Author: Again, this is speculation for possible future usages, not in any means a fully proven design.

But, for example, the user would specify:

```yaml
spec:
  qosResources:
  - name: k8s.io/podqos
    class: Guaranteed
```

and then the pod would be put as a guaranteed pod in the cgroup hierarchy etc.

- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Add support to Kubernetes for declaring _quality-of-service_ resources, and
assigning these to Pods. A quality-of-service (QoS-class) resource is similar
to other Kubernetes resource types (i.e. native resources such as `cpu` and
`memory` or extended resources) because you can assign that resource to a
particular container. However, QoS-class resources are also different from
those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,
rather than to declare a specific amount of capacity that is allocated.

Main characteristics of the new resource type (and the technologies they are
aimed at enabling) are:

> - multiple containers can be assigned to the same class of a certain type of

Reviewer 6: Maybe also "classes are mutually exclusive - a given entity can only have one class assigned for each resource". or something?

Author: Thanks, this is a good addition. I now added the following:

*classes are mutually exclusive - a given entity (pod or container) can only have one class assigned for each type of QoS-class resource resource*

WDYT @thockin?

Reviewer 6: Thanks

granularity, for example container-level cgroups in Linux or cache and memory
bandwidth control technologies. Examples for pod-level QoS include e.g.
pod-level cgroups or network QoS that cannot support per-container granularity.

### Goals

- Make it possible to request QoS-class resources from the PodSpec
  - Container-level QoS-class resources
  - Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resources
- Make it simple to implement new types QoS-class resource
- Make QoS-class resources opaque (as possible) to Kubernetes
- Support automatic discovery of the available QoS-class resources
- Support per-node status/capacity of QoS-class resources
- Access control ([future work](#future-work))
- Support updating QoS-class resource assignment of running containers
  ([future work](#in-place-pod-vertical-scaling))

### Non-Goals

- Interface or mechanism for configuring the QoS-class resources (responsibility of
  the container runtime).
- Specifying available (QoS-class) resource types or their detailed behavior
- API changes to support updating Pod-level (sandbox-level) QoS-class resource
  assignment of running pods (will be subject to a separate KEP)

> - Per runtime class QoS (needs a separate KEP if this is desired, as it must

Reviewer 6: This seems rather important, doesn't it?  I don't know how often a node has more than one runtime class, but it doesn't seem right to assume that all QoS classes are present on all runtimes?

Author: I think this is a much broader problem that just QoS resources and thus would deserve a separate KEP. Currently, there is not concept of per-runtime-class ("nested") structuring of resources. The same problem of resource being unavailable for some runtime class may be the case for other resources as well (thinking about vm-based/confidential/non-runc containers).

WDYT @thockin?

Reviewer 3: @thockin we had discussion about runtimeclasses with @mikebrow in the context of how it is implemented in containerd several months ago. The conclusion was that nobody is ready to open that pandora box to have all resources nested/flavoured on per runtimeclass. because that would hit everything, image pulling (different runtime  classes in containerd can have different snapshotters/handlers of imaging layer), not all native, extended or device plugin resources are potentially compatible with all runtime handlers and so on. That's the reasons why this KEP is declaring it out of scope and keeping the "flat" per-node resource model. If at some point we want to have resources to be nested under the runtime classes for capacities/compatibilities tracking, it would definitely deserve separate huge KEP, as it would touch practically every bit of resource accounting in every component.

Reviewer 15: reading into Tim's question a bit.. let's discuss what should happen with respect to node assignment/startup of a pod that has QoS class(es) known to not be presently supported on the runtime class implementation requested by the pod spec. That would be sufficient perhaps? For example, runtime default is runc/crun and supports this class list...

Reviewer 6: @marquiz - I agree with "The same problem ... may be the case for other resources as well".  That doesn't make me happy, though.

 type LimitRangeItem struct {
@@ -5167,6 +5167,28 @@ type LimitRangeItem struct {
        // MaxLimitRequestRatio represents the max burst value for the named resource
        // +optional
        MaxLimitRequestRatio ResourceList
+       //  QOSResources specifies the limits for QoS resources.
+       QOSResources []LimitQOSResource
+}
+
+// LimitQOSResource specifies limits of one QoS resources type.
+type LimitQOSResource struct {
+       // Name of the resource.
+       Name QOSResourceName
+       // Default specifies the default class to be assigned.
+       // +optional
+       Default string
+       // Max usage of classes
+       // +optional
+       Max []QOSResourceClassLimit
+}
+
+// QOSResourceClassLimit specifies a limit for one class of a QoS resource.
+type QOSResourceClassLimit struct {
+       // Name of the class.
+       Name string
+       // Capacity is the limit for usage of the class.
+       Capacity int64
 }
```

`<<[UNRESOLVED @logicalhan]>>`

Use field name `Ceiling` instead `Capacity` in QOSResourceClassLimit.

`<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>`

Not supporting Max (i.e. only supporting Default) in LimitRanges could simplify
the API.

#### Cluster autoscaler

> The cluster autoscaler support will be extended to support QoS-class resources.

Reviewer 6: I find this paragraph vague and unconvincing. :)

Autoscaling has really become a requirement for many users, and this text doesn't explain to me how the autoscalers (we now have more than one!) are able to reason about "if I make a new node of shape X, it will satisfy this pod".  We left this for "later" in other efforts and it really bit us in the butt.

If you think you have an answer, can you please flesh this out?  If you don't think you have an answer, we need to think about it.

@johnbelamaric @mwielgus

Author: Fair point @thockin (especially in the light of the recent DRA activities). I admit that this is vague and lacking details.

I will get back to this. My plan is now to have a PoC of a cluster autoscaler to have confidence that it can be done and write out the details here.

Reviewer 6: In case it wasn't clear, my comment was not meant to be rude. 

![vague_and_unconvincing](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/assets/5595220/f11edae1-45f3-4876-bdb9-3bc72d9dc3c4)

Author: @thockin no offence taken 😅 

I took me a while to get back to this as I was not really familiar with the cluster autoscaler details. I wanted to try it out in practice and I did do a PoC implementation based on a kind cluster with CAPD deployed and running cluster-autoscaler against that. Scaling up node groups with one (or more) existing nodes worked pretty much out-of-the-box (after building cluster-autoscaler against my PoC kubernetes scheduler implementation). Because all of the scheduling logic (of QoS resources) is in k/k scheduler itself, the autoscaler correctly runs simulations and can determine how many nodes in what nodegroups need to be scaled up (based on the QoS resources available in existing nodes), also providing log messages why certain node group isn't suitable. What is missing is the provider-specific mechanism to inform the cluster autoscaler about QoS-resources of empty node groups but I wouldn't expect that to be an insurmountable problem (follow along the lines what is done for extended resources). I updated the KEP accordingly. WDYT?

      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

TBD.

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

TBD.

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Author: @aojea I cannot think how CDI could satisfy all the requirements here 🤔 First there's the Kubernetes API (for which CDI brings no avail). Then, complicating the device plugin API for the QoS-resources hasn't even been in considered tbh (instead, we try to make kubelet's life easier)

The first implementation phase only adds basic filtering of nodes based on
QoS-class resources and node scoring is not altered. However, the relevant
scheduler plugins (e.g. NodeResourcesFit and NodeResourcesBalancedAllocation)
could be extended to do scoring based on the capacity (maximum number of
assignments to a class), availability (how much of that still is available,
i.e. capacity minus the current number of assignments) and usage (the current
number of assignments to a class) of QoS-class resources on the nodes.

#### Kubelet-initiated pod eviction

QoS-class resources available on a node are dynamic in the sense that they may
change over the lifetime of the node. E.g. re-configuration of the container
runtime may make new types of QoS-class resources available, properties of
existing resources may changes (e.g. the set of available classes or their
capacity) or some resources might be removed completely. It might be desirable
that kubelet could evict a running pod that request QoS-class resources that
are no more available on the node. This should be relatively straightforward to
implement as kubelet knows what QoS-class resources are available on the node

> and also monitors all running pods.

Reviewer 16: Some areas that eviction manager is starting to show its age (:().

- If one wants to add more disks to kubelet, we lose the ability for eviction manager to monitor it.
- PSI based eviction
- Swap based eviction
- Moving things out of root partition (logs come in mind)

I've been thinking that eventually we are going to need some kind of pluggable eviction manager based on certain resources. It should be general but I haven't really made much progress on it. wanted to throw this out there as it may be worth considering.

Author: @kannon92 thanks for the idea. Do you have any PoC implementation on this? If you have, it would be nice to wire it up to my code and see how it works.

QoS, as an alternative to
[KEP-2570: Support Memory QoS with cgroups v2][kep-2570].

It would be easy to enable also for example `memory.swap.*` control knobs
available in Linux cgroups v2 to control swap-usage on a per-container basis.

##### Runtime classes

The QoS-class resources mechanism could be used to replace (or
re-implement) the current runtime classes.

One benefit of using a QoS-class resource to represent runtime classes would be
the "automatic" visibility to what runtime classes are available on each node.
E.g. adding a new runtime class on a node by re-configuration of the runtime
would be immediately reflected in the node status without any additional admin
tasks (like node labeling or manual creation of RuntimeClass objects).

##### Splitting Pod QoS Class

Currently the Pod QoS class is an implicit property of a Pod, tied to how the
resource requests and limits of its containers are specified. QoS-class
resources could make it possible for users to explicitly specify the Pod QoS
class in the Pod's `.spec`, making it possible e.g. to define a pod with a
container whose memory limit is higher than the requests, but that is treated
by the node as `Guaranteed`.

> Taking this idea further, QoS-class resources could also make it possible to

Reviewer 16: This is very close to https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/78848.

Author: Thanks @kannon92 for the reference, I'll add it to the proposal. This is already speculated in [Splitting Pod QoS Class](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/fc082b2691fb77558983ee6ef1a9445ecf07ca85/keps/sig-node/3008-qos-class-resources/README.md#splitting-pod-qos-class) section but I wasn't aware of this open issue.

split several properties implicit in the Pod QoS class (for example: eviction
behavior or OOM scoring) into separate properties. For example, in the case of
OOM scoring make it possible for the user to specify a burstable pod with low
OOM priority (low chance of being killed).

##### Pod priority class

One wild idea would be to implement pod priority class mechanism (or part of
it) as a QoS-class resource. This would be a
[Kubernetes-managed](#kubernetes-managed-qos-class-resources) pod-level
QoS-class resource. Likely benefits of using the QoS-class resources mechanism
would be to be able to set per-namespace defaults with LimitRanges and allow
permission-control to high-priority classes with ResourceQuotas.

> 

Reviewer 16: Another idea is smarter oom setups (systemd-oomd for example).

systemd-oomd allows one to set settings for oom (psi based pressure and swap usage) on a cgroup slice. I could envision a future where one can create a QoS and that gives knobs to control systemd-oomd for more aggressive oom.

Reviewer 16: https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Changes/EnableSystemdOomd

I was playing around with this and I explored the ideas of setting different knobs based on the existing kubepods slices.

Author: Interesting. So you think a about pre-defined oom kill classes (in contrast to e.g. exposing every possible systemd-oomd knob to the user). At first thought, this sounds like a good fit. I'll add this to the proposal too, as a possible future use case.

### Widen the scope

The currently chosen strategy of this KEP is "minimum viable product" with
incremental future steps of improving and supplementing the functionality. This
strategy was chosen in order to make the review easier by handling smaller
digestible (but still coherent and self-contained) chunks at a time.

An alternaive would be to widen the scope of this KEP to include some or all of
the subjects mentioned in [future work](#future-work) (i.e. resource discovery,
status/capacity and access control).

## Infrastructure Needed (Optional)

<!--
Use this section if you need things from the project/SIG. Examples include a
new subproject, repos requested, or GitHub details. Listing these here allows a
SIG to get the process for these resources started right away.
-->

For proper end-to-end testing of RDT, a cluster with nodes that have RDT
enabled would be required. Similarly, for end-to-end testing of blockio, nodes
with blockio cgroup controller and suitable i/o scheduler enabled would be
required.

<!-- References -->
[intel-rdt]: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/resource-director-technology.html

> [linux-resctrl]: https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/x86/resctrl.html

Reviewer 17: This URL now 404s

Reviewer 18: New link:
```suggestion
[linux-resctrl]: https://docs.kernel.org/arch/x86/resctrl.html
```

resources. An additional possible usage would be to set per-pod limits on the
usage of container-level QoS-class resources.

```diff
 // LimitRangeItem defines a min/max usage limit for any resource that matches on kind
 type LimitRangeItem struct {
@@ -5167,6 +5167,28 @@ type LimitRangeItem struct {
        // MaxLimitRequestRatio represents the max burst value for the named resource
        // +optional
        MaxLimitRequestRatio ResourceList
+       //  QoSResources specifies the limits for QoS resources.
+       QoSResources []LimitQoSResource
+}
+
+// LimitQoSResource specifies limits of one QoS resources type.
+type LimitQoSResource struct {
+       // Name of the resource.
+       Name QoSResourceName
+       // Default specifies the default class to be assigned.
+       // +optional
+       Default string
+       // Max usage of classes
+       // +optional
+       Max []QoSResourceClassLimit
+}
+
+// QoSResourceClassLimit specifies a limit for one class of a QoS resource.
+type QoSResourceClassLimit struct {
+       // Name of the class.
+       Name string
+       // Capacity is the limit for usage of the class.
+       Capacity int64
 }
```

> Just using LimitRanges for specifying defaults could simplify the API.

Reviewer 6: This is a nice feature (per-NS defaults) but doesn't solve what happens when there isn't a default defined in a particular NS or for a particular resource.  So at best, this is a default override.

Author: Ha, totally agree. My wording here was twisted. What I tried to state is "Not supporting Max (i.e. only supporting Default) in LimitRanges could simplify the API". Updated the KEP

Just using LimitRanges for specifying defaults could simplify the API.

#### Implicit defaults

If nothing is requested for a QoS-class resource, a pod/container still
implicitly belongs to some class. By design there is no such thing as being in
no QoS class. What this "unnamed" default class means or how it is handled is
considered an implementation detail of the runtime. However, it would be
potentially desirable for the user to be able to see what was classes the
application was implicitly assigned to (even if nothing was explicitly

> requested). The first implementation phase contains no mechanism for this.

Reviewer 6: So to be clear - the 1st phase is:
* pod says nothign about QoS
* pod gets scheduled
* pod gets assigned to some default
* user doesn't get to know what happened

?

I'm not sure I am comfortable with that.

Author: Yes, that's how it would work.

Concerns noted, I need to sleep over this and think about a solution to propose

Author: This should now be addressed e.g. in the "Implicit defaults" and "PodStatus" sections

Some considerations/questions:

> - where can user see what was implicitly given? new field in PodStatus?

Reviewer 6: That was my assumption

- how to communicate what is effective for each pod and container

> - implicit default might change after runtime re-configuration

Reviewer 6: you can't change the default from underneath a running pod - this is why persisting it into status is important

Reviewer 5: Why is it impossible to change for a running pod? Is it a limitation we need to enforce or the limitation of specific resource types?

Author: I'd have the same question as @SergeyKanzhelev. I think it could change for a running pod (if it's possible for the specific resource type). In some case container runtime would just e.g. adjust the throttling parameters according to the new default

> - new QoS resource types might be added e.g. because of re-configuration of the

Reviewer 6: ...and must be persisted into status ASAP

The detailed design presented here covers [implementation phase 1](#phase-1)
(see [implementation phases](#implementation-phases) for an outline of all
planned changes). Configuration and management of the QoS-class resources is
fully handled by the underlying container runtime and is invisible to kubelet.

Summary of the proposed design details:

> - QoS resources are opaque (just names) to kubernetes, configuration and

Reviewer 6: nit: I'd say "handled in the nodes (kubelet, container runtime, etc)" which leaves room for the idea of kubelet-defined resources and classes

Author: Changed to *...handled in the node (container runtime, kubelet)...*

Author: solved (I think) @thockin

Author: ping @thockin, do you think this is resolved?

 type PodSpec struct {
@@ -3062,6 +3069,10 @@ type PodSpec struct {
        ResourceClaims []PodResourceClaim
+       // QoSResources specifies the Pod-level requests of QoS resources.
+       // Container-level QoS resources may be specified in which case they
+       // are considered as a default for all containers within the Pod.
+       // +featureGate=QoSResources
+       // +optional
+       QoSResources []PodQoSResourceRequest
 }

+// PodQoSResourceRequest specifies a request for one QoS resource type for a
+// Pod.
+type PodQoSResourceRequest struct {
+       // Name of the QoS resource.
+       Name QoSResourceName
+       // Name of the class (inside the QoS resource type specified by Name field).
+       Class string
+}
```

There is an ongoing effort to add [Pod level resource limits][kep-2837] that
aims at adding a pod level `Resources`. However, we propose to add a distinct

> QoSResources field (with a distinct PodQoSResourceRequest type) in the PodSpec

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure I agree with this - can you explain?

Author: As per [this comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3004#discussion_r1093864811) I added separate structures for Pod and Container QoS resource requests. Not re-using (or cross-using) any existing types.

Maybe the reference to [KEP-2837](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1592) is just confusing and should be dropped?

### Open Questions

#### Class capacity

Resource quota provides a way to restrict access to certain types of QoS-class
resources and their classes. However, the current design does not contain any
mechanism for controlling the number of assigments into a certain class on
per-node or per-namespace basis. That is. say that "only 2 containers can be
assigned to RDT class *gold* on this node".

This concept was deliberately left out of the proposal in order to reduce
confusion with other countable resources (native resources, extended
resources). Also, capacity does not often fully fit together with QoS
prioritization: generally there needs to be at least one "unlimited" class as
each container or pod needs to belong to some class.

> However, there are at least two mechamisms how class capacity can be

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
However, there are at least two mechanisms how class capacity can be
```

Author: Thanks @logicalhan, fixed

+}
```

#### Consts

We define standard well-known QoS-class resource types in the API. These are
considered as the canonical list of "official" QoS-class resource names. In
addition to the name the API documents the expected high-level behavior and
semantics of these canonical QoS-class resources to provide common standards
across different implementations.

<<[UNRESOLVED @sftim]>>
The canonical Kubernetes names for QoS-class resources are non-namespaced (i.e.
without a `<namespace>/` prefix). Namespaced (or fully qualified) names like
`example.com/acme-qos` are not controlled and are meant for e.g. vendor or
application specific QoS implementations.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

```diff
+const (
+       // QoSResourceRdt is the name of the QoS-class resource named IntelRDT
+       // in the OCI runtime spec and interfaced through the resctrlfs
+       // pseudp-filesystem in Linux. This is a container-level reosurce.

> +       QoSResourceIntelRdt = "rdt"

Reviewer 6: "QoS" is going to confuse coder that tries to extract other_style_names from BumpyCapsWithAcronyms.

QoSResource -> qo_s_resource

I propose QOS in names.

(another example this done badly is IPv6 -> I_Pv6)

Author: Naming is hard :) -> Changed as suggested
